Decentralized dynamic task allocation for UA Vs with
limited communication range
Marc Pujol-Gonzaleza, Jesus Cerquides a, Pedro Meseguer a,
Juan A. Rodriguez-Aguilar a,∗, Milind Tambeb
aArtiﬁcial Intelligence Research Institute of the Spanish National Research Council
(IIIA-CSIC), Campus de la UAB, 08193 Bellaterra, Spain
bUniversity of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089
Abstract
We present the Limited-range Online Routing Problem (LORP), which involves
a team of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) with limited communication range
that must autonomously coordinate to service task requests. We ﬁrst show a
general approach to cast this dynamic problem as a sequence of decentralized
task allocation problems. Then we present two solutions both based on modeling
the allocation task as a Markov Random Field to subsequently assess decisions
by means of the decentralized Max-Sum algorithm. Our ﬁrst solution assumes
independence between requests, whereas our second solution also considers the
UAVs’ workloads. A thorough empirical evaluation shows that our workload-
based solution consistently outperforms current state-of-the-art methods in a
wide range of scenarios, lowering the average service time up to 16%. In the best-
case scenario there is no gap between our decentralized solution and centralized
techniques. In the worst-case scenario we manage to reduce by 25% the gap
between current decentralized and centralized techniques. Thus, our solution
becomes the method of choice for our problem.
Keywords: task allocation, unmanned aerial vehicles, max-sum, decentralized
1. Introduction
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) are an attractive technology for large-
area surveillance [1]. Today, there are readily available UAVs that are rea-
sonably cheap, have many sensing abilities, exhibit a long endurance and can
communicate using radios. Several applications can be eﬃciently tackled with a
∗Corresponding author
Email addresses: mpujol@iiia.csic.es (Marc Pujol-Gonzalez), cerquide@iiia.csic.es
(Jesus Cerquides), pedro@iiia.csic.es (Pedro Meseguer), jar@iiia.csic.es
(Juan A. Rodriguez-Aguilar), tambe@usc.edu (Milind Tambe)
July 1, 2021
arXiv:1809.07863v1  [cs.NI]  31 Aug 2018
team of such UAVs: power line monitoring, ﬁre detection, and disaster response
among others [2].
UAVs have traditionally been controlled either remotely or by following
externally-designed ﬂight plans. Requiring human operators for each UAV im-
plies a large, specialized and expensive human workforce. Likewise, letting
UAVs follow externally prepared plans introduces a single point of failure (the
planner) and requires UAVs with expensive (satellite) radios to maintain contin-
uous communication with a central station. These constraints are acceptable in
some application domains, other applications require more ﬂexible techniques.
For instance, consider a force of park rangers tasked with the surveillance of
a large natural park. Upon reception of an emergency notiﬁcation, the rangers
must assess the situation as quickly as possible. With this aim, they could de-
ploy a team of UAVs continuously ﬂy throughout the park. Thereafter, they
could issue requests for their UAVs to check certain locations. To maintain the
cost-eﬀectiveness of the approach, such UAVs cannot employ expensive commu-
nication devices. Thus, the UAVs would have limited communication ranges,
oftentimes signiﬁcantly smaller than the park’s extension. Notice that, in this
setting, neither human remote control nor centralized planning is feasible due
to such communication constraints.
In this scenario, a possibility would be to deploy the planes with a ﬁxed
mission, so that they just go to the desired location(s), perform any required
checks and ﬂy back to some base. However, this approach is grossly unequipped
to handle the dynamism of the problem. That is, during a critical situation (e.g.,
when there is an actual ﬁre in the park), the rangers will receive many reports,
and will quickly run out of UAVs to handle them. A possibly better approach
involves UAVs that can act autonomously and can coordinate between them.
Such UAVs keep ﬂying around the park and coordinate to attend requests as
they are introduced into the system by rangers, thus hopefully improving their
eﬀectiveness.
Nevertheless, the autonomous operation and coordination of UAVs is an
open research question receiving increasing attention. It involves challenges
ranging from low-level operational details of ﬂight control to high level coordi-
nation between UAVs [3]. In this paper we assume that low level control can
be handled entirely by the UAVs’ auto-pilot systems, and focus on high-level
coordination challenges instead.
There are two main approaches to enable such coordination in the literature,
each best suited for a diﬀerent kind of UAV missions. On the one hand, the
objective in exploratory missions is to collect accurate information and keep it
updated. Hence, the ﬁrst approach focuses on shared information collection,
fusion and maintenance techniques to fulﬁll these missions [4]. On the other
hand, some applications involve speciﬁc tasks that the UAVs should carry. For
instance, check requests introduced by the rangers can be considered as tasks to
be performed by the UAVs. Hence, coordination between UAVs in this context
implies making decisions about which UAV should conduct each task.
Unfortunately, most state-of-the-art multi-agent allocation mechanisms can-
not be employed in our settings, particularly due to the communication range
2
limitation. Hence, we ﬁrst identify the characteristics and particular challenges
of such applications and deﬁne the Limited-range Online Routing Problem
(LORP) to capture them. After studying these characteristics, we advocate
for a solution approach where UAVs make quick decisions based solely on local
information, where the neighbors of a UAV are those UAVs with which it can
directly communicate at a given point in time.
Next, we introduce a solution approach based on representing the problem
as a factorized utility function (actually a Markov Random Field) and optimiz-
ing it using the Max-Sum distributed algorithm. This technique provides two
signiﬁcant advantages: (i) the problem is represented as a single global utility
function. Hence, the collective behavior of the UAVs is easier to predict and
reason about than when it emerges from the deﬁnition of individual behaviors;
and (ii) we can draw results from the extensive Max-Sum literature, including
its theoretical properties (e.g.: convergence and quality guarantees [5, 6]) and
encouraging experimental results [7].
We present an initial development of this solution in Section 4, assuming
that the cost of servicing each request is independent of other requests assigned
to the UAV. Thereafter, we introduce a second solution where UAVs adjust
their estimations of the cost of servicing a task depending on their workload,
with a slight increment in complexity. As a result, UAVs using this solution are
better equipped to dynamically capture and exploit the distribution of incoming
requests.
The contributions of this paper are the following:
• We introduce the LORP and identify its need for quick loops of assessment,
decision and action in highly dynamic, communication constrained UAV
applications.
• We propose to cast the LORP as an optimization problem and distribut-
edly solve it using Max-Sum, thus providing great ﬂexibility to introduce
new heuristics without modifying the solving algorithm.
• We capitalize on this advantage by introducing the workload heuristic,
which exploits the dynamic characteristics of the problem to make better
decisions.
• We empirically evaluate the proposed algorithms, showing that: (i) the
proposed approach allows for eﬀective request allocation in a highly dy-
namic, communication constrained domain; and (ii) our workload-based
solution achieves between 6% and 16% lower service times than current
state-of-the-art methods, and its actual performance comes very close to
that of centralized solutions.
The contributions above build upon and extend the preliminary work pre-
sented in [8]. However, notice that here we improve that work by: (i) relating
it to current state-of-the-art literature, (ii) presenting the LORP as a general
problem and showing how to cast it as a distributed task allocation problem, (iii)
providing proofs of the results that allow us to improve Max-Sum’s eﬃciency,
3
and (iv) performing a thorough empirical comparison between the proposed
algorithms and the related methods.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. First, Section 2 reviews current
coordination approaches. Next, Section 3 describes our problem in detail, along
with an example scenario. Thereafter we present a ﬁrst MRF-based solution
in Section 4, explaining how the LORP can be encoded and eﬃciently solved
using Max-Sum. Then, Section 5 shows how to improve this representation to
better spread the workload between planes. Finally, Sections 7 and 8 empirically
evaluate our approach, and Section 9 presents some conclusions and further lines
of work.
2. Related Work
There exists a large body of research related to multi-agent (and/or multi-
robot) task allocation.
Our problem is actually a variant of the Single-Task, Single-Robot (ST-
SR) dynamic Multiple Travelling Salesman Problem (MTSP) as described in
Gerkey’s taxonomy of multi-robot task allocation systems [9]. In the MTSP,
a number of robots (or agents) have to visit a number of waypoints in the
minimum possible time, while new waypoints may be introduced at any time.
In fact, our variant is even harder than the MTSP because of the communication
range limitation, and hence it is also strongly NP-Hard.
Most works on the MSTP focus on market-based allocation mechanisms [10,
11, 12, 13], where tasks are allocated to agents using auctions. The pre-cursor
in this area is the auction algorithm [14], an iterative distributed algorithm to
optimally solve the classic assignment problem [15]. The assignment problem
is a static task allocation problem where several tasks can be allocated to a
number of agents. Each agent has a diﬀerent cost for performing each task,
and can only be assigned to a single task. Then, the objective is to ﬁnd the
allocation that minimizes the total cost incurred after assigning all tasks.
Nonetheless, on most actual-world applications there may be more tasks than
agents. If the cost for a robot to perform two tasks is simply the addition of the
costs of performing each task separately, then the above algorithm still yields an
optimal allocation. However, in routing problems the cost of visiting multiple
waypoints depends on the relative positions between those waypoints. Hence,
the auction algorithm is not optimal in this case, and can lead to arbitrarily
bad solutions [9].
A ﬁrst step to mitigate this problem is introduced in [11]. Instead of per-
forming an iterative auction, the idea here is to perform a parallel single-item
auction for each task. These auctions can be resolved in a single round. Af-
terwards, tasks are continuously re-auctioned, but with agents’ bids updated to
account for the new state of the world. This approach, described as the Par-
allel Single-Item (PSI) auctions mechanism in [16], improves the robustness of
the system and equips it to handle changing conditions and/or the introduction
of new tasks. Although PSI auctions capture some of those dependencies by
4
reallocating tasks when conditions change, another possibility is to explicitly
consider them. In the Sequential Single-Item auctions [17] method, agents per-
form an iterative auction where a single task is assigned at each iteration. After
each round, agents update their bids according to the tasks they already got
in previous iterations, hence taking into account the synergies between tasks.
This approach even has quality guarantees in static domains [18], but is not
well-suited for dynamic domains because it requires both an arbitrary number
of communication cycles and global communication.
An entirely diﬀerent approach to task allocation is to employ consensus algo-
rithms [19, 20] to let agents maintain consistent information about the system’s
state. After reaching consensus, each agent can independently compute its plan
using a deterministic algorithm, and the resulting plans are guaranteed to be
consistent with each other. The main advantage of these algorithms is that they
have been shown to converge even on time-varying network topologies. However,
the time required to reach such convergence is unbounded and they cannot con-
verge during network partitions. Hence, consensus-based works typically strive
to either guarantee network connectedness [21] or minimize the impact of such
a potentially large decision making time. For instance, [22] presents a UAV
coordination model for ﬁre perimeter tracking, where UAVs reach a consensus
on which section of the perimeter is to be monitored by each UAV. When the
conditions change, the UAVs keep monitoring their section until a new consen-
sus is eventually reached. Because the ﬁre perimeter is unlikely to evolve very
rapidly, the previous assignment works relatively well even if takes a long time
to reach a new consensus.
Finally, some researchers tried to combine the advantages of market-based
mechanisms (quick decisions) with those of the consensus-based ones (eventual
consistency) [23]. Along these lines, Choi et. al. [24] introduced the Consensus
Based Bundle Algorithm (CBBA), that directly reaches a consensus on (an
auction-based) solution. Nonetheless, this approach still suﬀers from the low
resiliency to network disconnections.
As detailed in the next section, LORP scenarios are highly dynamic and
involve very rapid changes in the communication network topology, including
frequent disconnections. Hence, consensus-based approaches do not seem par-
ticularly well suited for this domain. Moreover, we can only employ the simpler
auction-based approaches (such as PSI) due to the lack of global communication.
3. The limited-range online routing problem
In this section we present the Limited-range Online Routing Problem. We
ﬁrst describe the problem intuitively and present an example scenario. There-
after, we show how it can be cast as a distributed task allocation problem.
3.1. Motivating Example
Consider a force of park rangers that acquires a ﬂeet of unmanned UAVs
to help them monitor a large natural park. The force intends to request its
5
operator
⇢1
⇢2
⇢3
⌧1
⌧2
⌧3
Figure 1: Example LORP scenario.
UAVs to check certain locations when alerts are received, or as part of their
routine surveillance plans. In turn, UAVs are expected to fulﬁll these requests
as quickly as possible. Speciﬁcally, UAVs should try to minimize the average
request service time, where service time is the amount of time passed between
the issue of a request by an operator and the arrival of an UAV to the request’s
location.1 A common approach to this kind of problems is to adopt a central-
ized strategy: UAVs’ routes are planned at a central station, which is in charge
of commanding them. Therefore, the central station guarantees cooperation
between UAVs. However, if the natural park is signiﬁcantly larger than the
UAVs communication ranges, performing centralized planning is unfeasible be-
cause the resulting plan can not be eﬀectively transmitted to UAVs. Figure 1
represents a snapshot of what the rangers’ scenario may look like at some point
in time. In this example, the force owns three UAVs labeled ρ1, ρ2, and ρ3.
The communication range of each UAV is drawn as a dotted circle around it.
By inspecting these circles, we observe that UAVs ρ1 and ρ2 can communicate
between them. Moreover UAV ρ3 can communicate with the rangers’ operator.
However, there is no way for UAVsρ1 andρ2 to communicate neither with UAV
ρ3 nor with the operator. The scenario contains three targets represented by
the black circles labelled with τ1, τ2, and τ3. A solid line linking a UAV with
a target indicates that the UAV is aware of that target. For instance, UAV ρ1
and UAVρ2 know that targets τ2 andτ3 exist, but they are not aware of target
τ1. Given this scenario, a centralized planner would probably send UAV ρ1 to
targetsτ3 andτ1, UAVρ2 to target τ2, and leave ρ3 idle. However, this plan of
action can never be computed nor implemented when assuming that UAVs have
limited communication range, because there is simply no way for ρ1 to discover
τ1 at this particular point in time.
Notice that the LORP itself does not specify how agents should represent
and relay information about which requests are pending and/or completed, nor
which messages can be exchanged. Hence, it is part of a LORP solution to deﬁne
a speciﬁc model and an algorithm that allows agents to make speciﬁc decisions.
Moreover, within this decision lies an essential trade-oﬀ that designers must
1We assume that a request is serviced as soon as a UAV reaches its location.
6
face. Intuitively, computing more accurate plans improves the quality of the
solution to the currently known part of the problem , and hence it is a desirable
goal. However, the better plans we want to compute, the more time our UAVs
have to invest into it, thus hindering their ability to adapt to the new incoming
requests. In contrast, we advocate for an approach speciﬁcally focused towards
better handling the unknown part of the problem , as explained in the following
section.
3.2. Approach
Notice that, unlike our example scenario above, the LORP is a highly dy-
namic problem where UAVs constantly move and new requests can be intro-
duced at any time. As a result, we argue that LORP solutions should strive
to make quick decisions. On the one hand, a long decision making process can
lead to arbitrarily bad decisions being made. That is, a decision that was good
when the decision making process started may end up being arbitrarily bad if
the process itself took too much time (during which the scenario’s conditions
kept evolving). On the other hand, making complex decisions (such as long
term plans for each UAV) is futile, because there’s a high probability that these
plans are invalidated. Likewise, operating in a decentralized manner introduces
an additional challenge: how to spread and maintain a consistent view of the
system between agents. For instance, a LORP solution must specify how UAVs
notify others of newly introduced requests, as well as of already serviced ones.
In our approach, we deal with these issues by deﬁning three main processes
that are going on simultaneously:
1. At any time, an operator may introduce a new request by notifying a
single UAV in its range, which becomes the request’s owner. If no UAV
is currently in its range, the operator must wait until one comes around.
So long as a UAV is the owner of a request, it is responsible for the
eventual servicing of that request. However, ownership of a request may
be transferred to another UAV as explained next. Since there is exactly
one owner of each request at a particular point in time, this guarantees a
consistent (yet distributed) view of the system by the UAVs.
2. Concurrently, UAVs run cycles of a request reallocation process. The real-
location process is a sequential process with three phases. First, the UAVs
construct a snapshot of the current situation by broadcasting their location
and the requests they currently own. Next, the UAVs run some decen-
tralized request allocation algorithm based on the collected information.
This phase may take several communication rounds between neighboring
UAVs, but such number of rounds must be strictly limited and known
beforehand. At the end of these rounds, the algorithm must have decided
on which plane should own each request. Finally, these decisions are ex-
ecuted by exchanging the requests’ ownership between planes. When a
full reallocation cycle ﬁnishes, the UAVs start a new one with updated
information.
7
3. Meanwhile, each UAV ﬂies towards the nearest it owns or tries to get in
range of the closest operator if it does not own any request. When a UAV
reaches the location of a request it owns, the request is considered serviced
and removed from the system.
We argue that this approach is particularly well suited for the LORP prob-
lem. First, the ownership concept frees the allocation algorithms from having
to maintain a consistent situational awareness because only the current owner
of a request may decide to allocate it to another UAV. Additionally, by enforc-
ing short allocation cycles the UAVs can make decisions quickly and re-consider
them as the situation evolves. Obviously, enforcing quick allocations prevents us
from employing sophisticated methods that best consider the currently known
part of the problem. However, we expect the beneﬁt of being able to constantly
reconsider those decisions to make up for –and even surpass– the loss in plan
accuracy from employing simpler allocation methods.
Arguably, another caveat of this approach is that it gives up the possibility
of a more controlled network deployment that tries to maximize the UAV’s cov-
erage of space, as introduced in other works [21, 25]. Nonetheless, our proposal
provides several signiﬁcant qualities that those works cannot achieve. First and
foremost, our proposal is inherently robust to failures. Even if a massive disrup-
tion renders several UAVs useless, our system will remain operative to make the
best possible use of the remaining ones. Second, by avoiding any centralization
whatsoever, our approach can scale to arbitrarily large numbers of tasks, UAVs
and space to cover. Finally, it allows for the emerge of self-organized network
structures adapted to the situation’s characteristics. Because this characteris-
tic is hard to understand, next we introduce a small example that illustrates
how our approach works, and highlights how the UAVs may self-organize while
following it.
3.3. Example of operation
Consider the example in Figure 2a. Here UAV ρ2 has no tasks assigned,
and hence is ﬂying back to get into operator range (as per process 3 explained
above). Meanwhile, UAV ρ1 is trying to complete task τ1, whereas UAV ρ3
just got task τ2 from the operator, and starts moving towards its location (also
because of process 3). After a while, as shown in Figure 2b, UAVs ρ2 andρ3 get
into communication range, and start a reallocation round (process 2). At this
point, a sensible allocation method probably assigns task τ2 to UAVρ2. Hence,
τ2’s ownership is transferred from UAV ρ3 to UAVρ2, which becomes the new
owner of this task. Finally, (by process 3) ρ2 now advances towardsτ2 whereas
ρ3 goes back to the operator to gather new tasks, as shown in Figure 2c. Notice
that, if further tasks are introduced around τ1 andτ2, UAVsρ2 andρ3 will keep
acting as “messengers” bringing those tasks from the operator to UAV ρ1 as
illustrated here. Thus, this example shows how UAVs following our approach
can naturally form task relay chains, even if the actual tasks are further than
what an connected communication chain could reach.
8
operator
⇢1 ⇢2
⇢3
⌧1
⌧2
(a) Initial situation
operator
⇢1 ⇢2
⇢3
⌧1
⌧2
(b) A reallocation negotiation begins
operator
⇢1 ⇢2
⇢3
⌧1
⌧2
(c) Task relaying is now complete
Figure 2: Example of task relaying without an enforced communication chain.
9
4. Coordination using Independent Valuations
The work in [26] shows that it is possible to model multi-agent problems as
MRFs, and then let agents ﬁnd the Maximum-A-Posteriori (MAP) of that ﬁeld
to make their decisions. In this section we show how a snapshot of a LORP
problem can be encoded as a MRF, assuming that requests are independent
between them (i.e, that the cost for a UAV to service two requests is the same
as the sum of costs of servicing them separately). Thereafter we use Max-Sum
to let UAVs compute an allocation in a distributed manner.
4.1. Problem Encoding as Binary MRF
Prior to encoding our problem, some notation is in place. Henceforth, Let
R ={τ1,...,τ m} be a set of requests, P ={ρ1,...,ρ n} be a set of UAVs, r and
p be indexes for requests and UAVs respectively, Rp⊆R be the set of requests
that UAV ρp can service, and Pr ⊆ P be the set of UAVs that can service
request τr. A naive encoding of the requests-to-UAVs allocation as an MRF is:
• Create a variable xr for each request τr. The domain of this variable is
the set of UAVs that can service the request, namely Pr. If xr takes value
ρp, it means that request τr will be serviced by UAV ρp.
• Create an constraintcp for each UAVρp, that evaluates the cost of servic-
ing the requests assigned to ρp. We assume independence, so the cost of
servicing a set of requests is the sum of the costs of servicing each request.
Xp is the set of variables that have ρp in their domains. An assignment of
values to each of the variables in Xp is noted as Xp. Solving the MAP problem
amounts to ﬁnding the combination of request-to-UAV assignments X∗ that
satisﬁes X∗ = arg minX
∑
p∈Pcp(Xp).
Figure 3a shows an encoding of the motivating example. There is a variable
for each request. The domain of x1 is the set of UAVs that can service request
τ1. This is eﬀectively the set of all UAVs that are in communication range of the
owner of τ1. Hence, the domain of x1 is just{ρ3}. Likewise, the domain of x2
andx3 is{ρ1,ρ 2} because both UAVs can fulﬁll it. Next, we create a functioncp
for each UAVρp. Because ρ3 can only service τ1, the scope of function c3 isx1.
As a result, c3 is a unary function that speciﬁes the cost for UAV ρ3 to service
τ1, namely the distance between ρ3 and τ1 (hereafter δpr will be employed as
a shorthand for the distance between ρp and τr). The scope of c2 is{x2,x 3},
because UAV ρ2 can service both τ2 and τ3. Hence, c2 speciﬁes four costs for
ρ2:
1. 0 if both requests are allocated to ρ1.
2. 2 (δ23) if τ2 is allocated to ρ1 but τ3 is allocated to ρ2.
3. 2 (δ22) if τ2 is allocated to ρ2, but τ3 is allocated to ρ1.
4. 4 (δ22 +δ23) if both requests are allocated to ρ2.
10
2
0
7
2
4
1
6
5
0
x1
ρ3
c1
c2
c3
x2x3
ρ1ρ1
ρ1
ρ1
ρ2
ρ2
ρ2ρ2
x2x3
ρ1ρ1
ρ1
ρ1
ρ2
ρ2
ρ2ρ2
x3
x2
x1
(a) Naive MRF encoding.
0
2
0
2
5
0
1
0
x2
x2x3
x3
c23 c22
c13 c12
ρ1
ρ2
ρ1
ρ2
ρ1
ρ2
ρ1
ρ2
7
x1
ρ3
x2
x1
c31
x3 (b) Independent valuation.
F 0
T 2
F 0
T 2
T 5
F 0
T 1
F 0
T
F
0
T
F
F
T
T
F
0
F
T 0
0
7T
F
s3
s2
s1
v23 v22
v13 v12 v31
z23 z22
z13 z12 z31
∞
∞
z13z23
z12z22
T
F
0
T
F
F
T
T
F
0
∞
∞
z31
∞
z23
z13
z12
z22
z31
(c) Independent task valuation, binary encoding.
Figure 3: Encoding the example LORP scenario.
c1 is similarly computed. From Figure 3a costs, the optimal assignment is
X∗ =⟨x1 =ρ3,x 2 =ρ2,x 3 =ρ1⟩.
This encoding scales poorly. First, it does not exploit the fact that we assume
independence when computing the cost of servicing a combination of requests in
the constraintscp. The number of entries incp is the product of the domain sizes
of each of the variables in its scope. Hence, the number of entries in cp scales
exponentially with respect to the number of requests that UAV ρp can service.
However, we can exploit the independence between requests by decomposing
each cost function cp into smaller cost functions, each one evaluating the cost
of servicing a single request. That is, thanks to that independence between
requests, we can represent cp as a combination of cost functions cpr, one per
variable in the scope of cp, such that cp(Xp) = ∑
xr∈Xpcpr(xr). Now, the
number of values to specify the cost of servicing a set of requests scales linearly
with respect to the number of requests. Figure 3b represents the example in
Figure 3a using this new encoding. Notice that for each UAV we specify the cost
of servicing a given request when the request is assigned to it, or 0 when allocated
to another UAV. However, the new encoding still suﬀers from redundancy. Say
that another UAV ρ4 is in the communication range of both ρ1 and ρ2. Since
this UAV would be eligible to serve requestsτ2 andτ3, the domain of x2 andx3
would become{ρ1,ρ 2,ρ 4}. As a result, UAV ρ1 must extend its cost function
c12 to include a new entry where τ2 is assigned to ρ4, whose cost is obviously 0.
Therefore, we must aim at an encoding such that a cost function cpr contains
only two values: δpr if τr is allocated to ρp, or 0 otherwise.
With this aim, we now convert the request variables into binary variables,
replacing each original variable xr ∈ X by a set of binary variables zpr, one
per UAV in Pr. Previous cpr cost functions now generate vpr cost functions
11
on these binary variables. In addition, for each r, zpr are linked through a
selection function sr to ensure that a request can be only serviced by a single
UAV. For instance, consider variable x2 with domain{ρ1,ρ 2}. We create two
binary variables z12 and z22. Intuitively, z12 being “on” means that request
τ2 is assigned to UAV ρ1. A selection factor linked to both z12 and z22 would
guarantee that only one of the two variables is set to “on”. In our example,
this selection function is a cost function s2, which introduces an inﬁnite cost
whenever there is no single variable active. Figure 3c shows the binary encoding
of the example in Figure 3b.
4.2. Solving the Problem with Max-Sum
Now we optimize the Max-Sum algorithm to run on the last encoding of Sec-
tion 4 (Figure 3c). Max-Sum sends messages from factors to variables and from
variables to factors. However, our factor graph allows for some simpliﬁcations.
Notice that each zpr is only linked to cost function vpr and to selector function
sr. It is direct to observe that the message that zpr must send to vpr is exactly
the one received from sr, while the message that it must send to sr is exactly
the one received from vpr. Then, since each variable simply relays messages be-
tween the cost function and selection function it is linked to, henceforth we will
disregard variables’ messages and instead we consider that functions directly
exchange messages.
The Max-Sum general message expression from function f to function g is
µf→g(Zf∩g) = min
Zf−g
[
f(Zf−g, Zf∩g) +
∑
g′∈N (f )
g′⁄=g
µg′→f(Zg′∩f)
]
(1)
where Zf∩g stands for an assignment to the variables in the scope of f and g,
Zf−g stands for an assignment to the variables in the scope of f that are not
ing,N(f) stands for the set of functions liked to f (f’s neighboring functions),
and µg′→f stands for the message from function g′ to f.
Observe in Figure 3c that selection and cost functions are connected by a
single binary variable. Thus, the messages exchanged between functions in our
problem will refer to the assignments of a single binary variable. In other words,
the assignment Zf∩g will correspond to some binary variable zpr. Therefore, a
message between functions must contain two values, one per assignment of a
binary variable. At this point, we can make a further simpliﬁcation and consider
sending the diﬀerence between the two values. Intuitively, a function sending
a message with a single value for a binary variable transmits the diﬀerence
between the variable being active and inactive. In general, we will deﬁne the
single-valued message exchanged between two functions as
νf→g =µf→g(1)−µf→g(0) . (2)
Next, we compute the messages between cost and selection functions.
12
(1) From cost function to selection function. This message expresses the diﬀer-
ence for a UAV ρp between serving request τr or not, therefore
νvpr→sr =vpr(1)−vpr(0) =δpr− 0 =δpr . (3)
(2) From selection function to cost function. Consider selection function sr and
cost function vpr. From equation 1, we obtain
µsr→vpr(1) = 0, and µsr→vpr(0) = min
ρp′∈Pr−ρp
δp′r .
Then we can apply equation 2 to obtain the single-valued message νsr→vpr =
− minρp′∈Pr−ρpδp′r. Moreover, this message can be computed eﬃciently. Con-
sider the pair⟨ν∗,ν∗∗⟩ as the two lowest values received by the selection function
sr. Then, the message that sr must send to each vpr is
νsr→vpr =
{
−ν∗ νvpr→sr⁄=ν∗
−ν∗∗ νvpr→sr =ν∗ . (4)
To summarize, each cost function computes and sends messages using equa-
tion 3; each selection function computes and sends messages using equation
4.
Max-Sum operation . Max-Sum is an approximate algorithm in the general
case, but it is provably optimal on trees. Due to how we encoded the problem,
the resulting factor graph contains a disconnected, tree-shaped component for
each request r (see Figure 3c). Thus, Max-Sum operates optimally in this
case. Moreover, the algorithm is guaranteed to converge after traversing the
tree from the leaves to the root and then back to the leaves again. In our case,
the tree-shaped component for each request is actually a star-like tree, with the
selection functionsr at the center, and all others connected to it. Hence, we are
guaranteed to compute the optimal solution in two steps if we pick sr as the
root node of each component.
Typically, Max-Sum’s decisions are made according to the costs seen by the
variable nodes after running the algorithm. However, we have no variables in
our graph anymore because we eliminated them. As a consequence, we have
to make the decisions at either the selector nodes sr or at the cost nodes vpr.
The best option is to let the selectors choose, because it guarantees that the
same task is never simultaneously assigned to two diﬀerent UAVs. Because the
decisions are made by the sr nodes, there is no need for the second Max-Sum
iteration (messages from selector to cost functions) anymore.
Notice that, after our reﬁnements, the only remaining Max-Sum nodes are
the cost functions vpr and a selection function sr for each request. Hence, the
UAVs can execute the algorithm distributedly by letting the cost functions vpr
run on UAV ρp, and the selection functions sr run on the current owner of the
request. Moreover, a UAV only needs to know which requests do its neighbors
have to build the logical nodes it must run. Thus, the whole graph can also be
built distributedly based only on the UAVs’ local information.
13
Max-Sum runs on our example as follows. First, each leaf cost function vpr
must send its cost to the root of its tree, sr. That is, UAV ρ1 sends 1 to s3
(within UAV ρ2), and 5 to s2 (within itself). Likewise, UAV ρ2 sends 2 to s2
and 2 to s3, whereas UAV ρ3 sends 7 to s1. Thereafter, the sr nodes decide by
choosing the UAV whose message had a lower cost. Hence, s3 (running within
UAVρ2) decides to allocate τ3 toρ1,s2 allocatesτ2 toρ2, ands1 allocatesτ1 to
ρ3. At this point the owner of each request knows whether a request should be
reallocated or not and to whom, so we can use it to implement the reallocation
phase described in Section 3.2.
5. Coordination using Workload-based Valuations
In realistic scenarios, requests do not appear uniformly across time and space
but concentrated around one or several particular areas, hereafter referred to
as hot spots. In that case, the assumption of independence in the valuation of
the requests provides an allocation that assigns a large number of requests to
the UAVs close to the hot spot, leaving the remaining UAVs idle. Thus, the
independence assumption is too strong because it leads to utterly unbalanced
allocations. Next, we show that it is possible to relax this assumption while
keeping an acceptable time complexity for Max-Sum. We introduce a new factor
for each UAV: a penalty that grows as the number of requests assigned to
the UAV increases. Formally, let Zp ={zpr|τr∈ Rp} be the set of variables
encoding the assignment to UAV ρp. The number of requests assigned to UAV
p is ηp =∑
r∈Rp zpr. The workload factor for UAV ρp is
wp(Zp) =f(ηp) =k· (ηp)α , (5)
where k≥ 0 and α≥ 1 are parameters that can be used to control the fairness
in the distribution of requests (in terms of how many requests are assigned to
each UAV). Thus, the larger theα and thek, the fairer the request distribution.
The direct assessment of Max-Sum messages going out of the workload factor
takes O(N· 2N−1) time, where N =|Zp|. Interestingly, the workload factor is
a particular case of a cardinality potential as deﬁned by Tarlow et. al. [27]. A
cardinality potential is a factor deﬁned over a set of binary variables ( Zp in
this case) that does only depend on the number of active variables. That is, it
does not depend on which variables are active, but only on how many of them
are active. As described in [27], the computation of the Max-Sum messages for
these potentials can be done in O(N logN). Thus, using Tarlow’s result we can
reduce the time to assess the messages for the workload factors from exponential
in the number of variables to linearithmic.
To further speedup the algorithm and reduce message exchanges, we can
add the workload factor and the cost factors that describe the cost for UAV ρp
to service each of the requests. Lemma 2 in the appendix shows that if we have
a procedure for determining the Max-Sum messages going out of a factor over
binary variables, say f, we can reuse it to determine the messages going out of
14
Algorithm 1 process(vp) ⊿ All undeﬁned values are∞
1: for r∈Rp do ⊿ Incorporate incoming messages
2: I[r] =νsr→vp +vpr(1)
3: end for
4: Pos,I′ = sorted(I) ⊿ Pos are the reverse indices, and I’ the sorted list
5: cs = 0
6: for i = 0 to|I′| do ⊿ Compute cumulative sums
7: CS 0[i] =cs +wp(i)
8: CS−[i] =cs +wp(i− 1)
9: CS +[i] =cs +wp(i + 1)
10: cs =I′[i] +cs
11: end for
12: for i = 0 to|I′| do ⊿ Compute cumulative mins
13: M +[i] =min(CS +[i],M +[i− 1])
14: M L[i] =min(CS 0[i],M L[i− 1])
15: M R[i] =min(CS 0[|I′|− i],M R[|I′|− i + 1])
16: M−[i] =min(CS−[|I′|− i],M−[|I′|− i + 1])
17: end for
18: for r∈Rp do ⊿ Compute and send messages
19: i =Pos [r]
20: ξ0 =min(M L[i− 1],M−[i + 1]−I′[i])
21: ξ1 =min(M +[i− 1],M R[i + 1]−I′[i])
22: νwp→sr =ξ1−ξ0 +vpr(1)
23: send( νwp→sr)
24: end for
a factor h that is the sum of f with a set of independent costs, one for each
variable.
Thus, we can deﬁne a single factor that expresses the complete cost of a UAV
when assigned a set of requests, which amounts to the sum of the independent
costs for each of the requests assigned plus the workload cost for accepting that
number of requests. Formally the cost factor for UAV ρp is
wp(Zp) +
∑
τr∈Rp
vpr(zpr) . (6)
Algorithm 1 deﬁnes how to assess the messages ﬂowing out of the cost factor
vp. It is obtained by composing Lemma 2 with the algorithm described in [27]
for cardinality potentials. 2 The algorithm is basically a dynamic programming
procedure for computing minimizations over cumulative sums, which can be
done in a few linear passes. The complexity is dominated by the initial sort
operation.
Summarizing, by introducing workload valuations that do not only depend
on each individual request, but also on the number of requests, we have shown
that it is possible to relax the assumption of independence between valuations
with a very minor impact on the computational eﬀort required to assess the
2The algorithm description provided in [27] is inaccurate. However, the authors own im-
plementation of the algorithm is correct. It does not match the description in [27] and is closer
to the description provided by Algorithm 1.
15
messages (from linear to linearithmic). In the next section we show that this
relaxation provides signiﬁcantly better allocations in terms of median service
time.
6. Evaluation methodology
In the following sections we want to empirically evaluate our MRF-based
solutions for the LORP. The evaluation will be performed using the MAS-
Planes [28] simulation environment. MASPlanes allows us to generate scenarios
of varying characteristics, and then run any of the implemented algorithms
against the exact same problem instances to see how they compare.
Comparing our algorithm’s performance against the current state-of-the-art
is tricky because, as explained in Section 2, most methods can not cope with
the requirements of our problem domain. Therefore, we implemented a relaxed
version of the problem to compare against them. In this relaxation, the allo-
cation is performed by a central agent that has no communication restrictions.
Furthermore, the centralized allocation procedure used by the centralized agent
is considered to be instantaneous. That is, there is no delay at all introduced
by the allocation procedure, whatever its computational cost may be. The
only constraint that such central planner enforces is that a UAV can not be
assigned to a request whose existence is unknown by that UAV. In the following
experiments, the central agent employs one of two diﬀerent request allocation
algorithms to make decisions using this relaxed problem.
First, the c-hungarian algorithm runs the Hungarian method [15] to com-
pute an allocation. This method optimally solves the assignment problem in
O(n3) time. However, recall that our problem is not an assignment problem
because: (i) unassigned requests will have to be performed later on; (ii) the cost
of servicing a request changes depending on the order; and (iii) new requests
may be introduced at any future time. Also notice that the solutions obtained
using this method correspond to those that would be found by the auction algo-
rithm [14]. Aside from the actual procedure, the only diﬀerence between these
methods is that the auction algorithm may be distributed, at the expense of
additional delays caused by communications. Hence, the results that we obtain
for this method provide an upper bound on the best results that a distributed
auction algorithm would obtain.
Second, c-greedy represents a straightforward sequential greedy algorithm as
presented in Algorithm 2. Initially, the central agent considers that no request
is allocated to any UAV. Then, it computes the best allocation (the allocation
with minimum cost) of a single task to a single UAV. Thereafter, it keeps ﬁnding
the best possible allocation of a single request to an UAV, but taking into
account the previously allocated requests. The process ends when all requests
have been assigned to some UAV. This procedure can be seen as a centralized
version of the Sequential Single Item [16] auctions mechanism. Hence, this
solution represents an upper bound of the results we would be able to achieve
while using SSI auctions if we were somehow able to use them. Because we
want to minimize the average service time, the c-greedy algorithm employs the
16
Algorithm 2 GreedyAllocation(P,R,V )
Input: P is a set of planes
Input: R is a set of requests
Input: V is a map where each V [p] are all requests known by p∈P
1: A[p] =∅,∀p∈P
2: while R⁄=∅ do
3: ⟨p∗,r∗⟩ = arg min p∈P,r∈R|r∈V [p] evaluate(r,A [p])
4: A[p∗] = insert(r∗,A [p∗])
5: R =R\{r∗}
6: end while
Output: A, a map where each A[p] are all requests allocated to p
recommended BidMinPath bidding rule from [18] as the evaluate() function
in Algorithm 2. Finally, notice that this method is also equivalent to the SGA
method presented in [24]. This implies that, as proven in that work, the decisions
obtained by c-greedy are equivalent to the solutions that would be obtained by
the Consensus-Based Bundle Algorithm (CBBA) in the ideal case of a static
network structure. Thus, c-greedy also represents an upper bound on the quality
of the solutions that CBBA would obtain if we were able to employ it.
For completeness, we also implemented centralized versions of our algo-
rithms: c-independent, that represents our MRF-based solution using indepen-
dent valuations; and c-workload, that uses workload valuations as detailed in
Section 5. These work exactly like the distributed versions, but within a single
central agent and thus without latency penalties when messages are exchanged.
All these centralized algorithms serve as baselines to assess the performance
of the distributed solutions. Obviously, the distributed solutions include our pro-
posed solutions d-independent (using independent valuations) and d-workload
(using workload valuations). Additionally, we implemented the distributed
state-of-the-art PSI method, and obtained very interesting results: the PSI
method and our d-independent method provide exactly the same decisions.
This can be seen by following the example execution in Section 4.2, and in-
terpreting it as if request owners opened an auction for each of the tasks they
have, and neighboring UAVs bid for them (lowest bid wins). Due to this exact
functional match between PSI and our solution, we only report results about
c-independent and d-independent, but these represent also the results obtained
by the PSI method. At this point, a keen reader may ask whether we could
employ workload evaluations (from eq. 6) in the PSI method. However, recall
that in PSI all tasks are auctioned in parallel. Thus, when two UAVs meet
and one has several more tasks than the other, the UAV with fewer tasks will
actually win all tasks (at the same time) because it has a much lower workload.
In the next reallocation cycle, the entirely opposite happens, and so on. In the
end, the result is a thrashing behavior that blocks both planes from performing
any useful work.
To Summarize, Table 1 presents the algorithms we test and their relationship
with other state-of-the-art approaches. Under the assumptions presented in
that table, the algorithm’s decisions would match those that we obtain in our
17
Method is the ideal implementation of if disregarding
c-hungarian Auction algorithm CD, SA
c-greedy CBBA CD, ND, SA
SSI auctions CD, ND, SA
c-independent PSI auctions CD, SA
Independent valuations CD, SA
c-workload Workload valuations CD, SA
d-independent PSI auctions -
Independent valuations -
d-workload Workload valuations -
Table 1: Relationship of the evaluated algorithms with other state-of-the-art approaches. CD,
DN and SA stand for Communication Delays, Network Dynamicity and Situational Awareness
respectively.
evaluation. However, this does not necessary imply that the algorithms can not
work without such assumptions. For instance, CBBA can operate on a dynamic
network, but would obtain worse results than those of c-greedy.
7. Eﬀects of the spatial distribution of requests
In this section we aim to validate the hypothesis that diﬀerent spatial dis-
tributions of the incoming requests may favor some methods over others. Be-
cause this assumption is independent of whether the algorithms can or cannot
work in a distributed manner, we start by comparing all algorithms using their
idealistic (centralized) implementation. Thereafter, we compare the results of
c-independent and c-workload with their actually applicable d-independent and
d-workload distributed counterparts.
7.1. Empirical settings
We prepared two scenarios that represent a time-span ( T ) of one month.
During that time, 10 UAVs with a communication range of 2 km survey a square
ﬁeld of 100 km 2. We assume that the UAVs always travel at a cruise speed of
50 km/h. In these scenarios, a single operator submits requests at a mean rate
of one request per minute. However, we introduce four crisis periods during
which the rate of requests is much higher. To accomplish this, the requests
submission times are sampled from a mixture of distributions. The mixture
contains four normal distributions Ni(µi, 7.2 h) (one per crisis period) and a
uniform distribution for the non-crisis period. The µi means themselves are
sampled from a uniform distribution U(T ).
The two scenarios diﬀer on the spatial distribution of requests. In the uni-
form scenario, requests are uniformly distributed along space, whereas the hot
spot scenario models a more realistic setting where crisis requests are localized
around hot spots. These spatial hot spots are deﬁned as bivariate Gaussian
distributions with randomly generated parameters. Figure 4 depicts an exam-
ple of such scenario, where colored dots stand for requests. The scattered dots
18
correspond to non-related requests, whereas related requests form dot clouds
around their hot spot. Finally, the strong dot represents the operator, and the
circle surrounding it represents its communication range.
To use the c-workload method we have to set values for the k andα param-
eters. Hence, we performed an exploration on the space of these parameters to
determine which values are suitable to thehot spot scenarios. Figure 5 shows the
results we obtained after this exploration. The colors correspond to the median
of the average service time that we obtained after running the algorithm in 30
diﬀerent scenarios for each pair (k,α ). For instance, when k = 102 andα = 1.12
the algorithm achieved a median average service time of 137 s. Observe that the
algorithm exhibits a smooth gradient for any ﬁxed value of α ork. Hence, good
combinations of k and α can be found by ﬁxing one parameter to a reasonable
value and performing a descent search on the other one. We chose k = 1000,
and found the best corresponding α to be 1 .36 with 0.01 precision. We also
conducted a similar exploration in the uniform scenario. However, the results
were similar for k values between 10 2 and 10 5, and α values between 1.01 and
1.68. Hence, we use the same values than in the hot spot scenario.
7.2. Results
Next we ran all centralized algorithms on a new set of 30 new problems of
each scenario to ensure that the parameters were not overﬁtted. Figure 6a shows
the average service time (time passed between when the request is generated
and when the planes service it) achieved by the diﬀerent algorithms in the
uniform scenario. The best performing algorithm is c-independent, with c-
workload being just 1% worse. Despite the small diﬀerence, all results are found
signiﬁcant by the (paired, nonparametric) Wilcoxon signed rank test [29] with
p = 0.01. The worst algorithm is clearly c-hungarian, taking nearly 16% more
time on average.
These results contrast with those of the hot spot scenario. As shown in
Figure 6b, c-workload rises as the best method in this case, taking 10% less
time than c-greedy and 14% less time than c-independent. Interestingly, this
means that both c-workload and c-greedy are able to capture and exploit the
underlying spatial distribution of requests, whereas c-independent works very
well when the requests are randomly distributed but is not well equipped to
handle other, more realistic distributions. Finally, c-hungarian’s results show
that completely disregarding the dynamism of the problem leads to overall bad
decisions.
At this point, it is clear that the underlying spatial distribution of tasks has
diﬀerent eﬀects on the varying methods. However, we must check whether such
diﬀerences still hold in the actually applicable distributed versions. Hence, we
ran the same scenarios, but this time using d-independent and d-workload to
compare their results with the respective idealized cases. Figure 7 shows the
results obtained on both scenarios. Notice that the diﬀerences persist, with d-
independent achieving insigniﬁcantly (p = 0.01) better results than d-workload
in the uniform scenario while being signiﬁcantly worse in the hot spots one.
19
In fact, d-workload turns out to be as good as c-independent in that scenario
according to the Wilcoxon test.
Aside from conﬁrming our hypothesis about the spatial distribution of re-
quests, this experiment also provides an idea about the cost of distributed
solving. Speciﬁcally, it shows that there’s a 20% time increase between the
distributed methods and their idealized counterparts in the uniform scenario,
and between 6% ({c,d}-independent) and 13% ({c,d}-workload) in the hot spots
one. The lower overhead in the hot spots scenario is due to requests being closer
between them, giving the planes more opportunities to coordinate.
8. Exploring d-workload’s behavior
In the previous Section we presented results on two scenarios that diﬀered
only on the spatial distribution of requests. However, it is still unclear how
d-workload will perform in other scenarios. Hence, in this section we aim at
providing a better inside on the behavior of d-workload under varying scenario’s
characteristics.
8.1. Empirical settings
To this end, we chose a number of scenario’s characteristics and prepared
a full factorial experiment to evaluate their impact on the diﬀerent algorithms.
To capture a wide range of scenarios yet keep the number of experiments within
a reasonable number, we selected the following four characteristics:
• Load. Deﬁnes the overall amount of requests per UAV. To keep things
simple, we always introduce a total of 43 , 200 requests (1 req/min on av-
erage), so the load is controlled solely by varying the number of available
UAVs.
• Spread. Captures how spatially spread the requests are between them.
In scenarios with low spread, the requests tend to be clustered together
around hotspots. In high-spread scenarios, the tasks are scattered around
a larger area. We control the spread of the scenario by deﬁning a hostspot-
radius. In the problems of that scenario, approximately 90% of the tasks
of each hotspot will be within hotspot-radius distance from the hotspot
center. Such distribution is achieved by sampling from an Inverse Wishart
distribution with 2.5 degrees of freedom and a scale matrix experimentally
adjusted to produce locations within the desired hotspot radius.
• Communication Range. Represents the UAVs’ (and operator) commu-
nication ranges.
• Time distribution Sharpness. Speciﬁes how constant is the rate at
which requests are introduced. Because we keep a constant number of
tasks for all scenarios, sharpness can be deﬁned fully in terms of the num-
ber of crises. In high sharpness scenarios, there is a single short and highly
active crisis period. In contrast, low sharpness scenarios contain nine dif-
ferent crisis periods of moderate activity, but no highly active period.
20
Feature Parameter (Low, Mid, High)
Load number of planes 20, 10, 5
Spread hotspot-radius 1 km, 3 km, 6 km
Communication Range communication range 1 km, 2 km, 3 km
Time distribution Sharpness number of crises 9, 3, 1
Table 2: Problem dimensions explored and their values
The chosen values for each feature are detailed in Table 2. For the character-
istics not described here we employed the values reported in Section 7. Namely,
the scenarios represent a full month of simulated time, with planes that move
at a constant speed of 52 km/h on a square area of 100 km 2.
Once again, we must decide the k and α values to use in our d-workload
method. From the previous results, we know that a good value for α can be
found for any reasonable k value. Therefore, we ﬁxed k = 1000 and explored
on the α parameter. Thus, we generated an example problem from each of the
above 81 scenarios, and ran d-workload with k = 1000 and α = [1.01, 1.02,.., 2]
on each of them. Figure 8 shows the mean and median average request service
times obtained for each α value. In those graphs we observe a (somewhat
rough) gradient, as expected by the previous results. Overall, the best α value
is α = 1.25, with a median service time of 276.9 s and a mean service time of
183.1 s.
8.2. Results
After choosing the k and α values, we are ready to compare all algorithms
in the diﬀerent scenarios. With this aim, we generated 30 problems of each
scenario (for a total of 2430 problems). On each of these problems we evaluate
the performance of: (i) d-independent, which represents both the state-of-the-
art PSI auctions method as well as our MRF-based solution with independent
valuations; (ii) c-greedy, that came up as the best existing centralized method;
(iii) d-workload, which is our novel proposed algorithm; and (iv) c-workload,
which represents a bound on the best performance achievable by our novel d-
workload mechanism.
Figure 9 shows the main eﬀects plots of each characteristic, with the results
of each algorithm represented as a percentage of the average service time with
respect to that of c-greedy. Albeit sometimes small, the diﬀerences between all
methods are deemed signiﬁcant by the Wilcoxon signed-rank test withp = 0.01.
Each plot shows the eﬀect of the studied characteristic averaging across the
levels of all other characteristics. For instance, the Low point for d-workload in
Figure 9a represents the average service time ofd-workload between all problems
with a Low load, whatever their spread, communication range and sharpness
levels are.
Figure 9a shows that the higher the load, the worse d-workload compares
to c-greedy. However, notice that c-workload displays an opposite behavior,
becoming better than c-greedy when there are more tasks per plane. This may
seem counterintuitive at ﬁrst, but has an easy explanation: recall that we control
21
the load by varying the number of available planes. Hence, the higher the load,
the less planes involved in the experiment. As a consequence, d-workload’s per-
formance degrades not because there are more tasks, but because the planes are
more spread and have less opportunities to coordinate. Moreover, d-workload
approaches c-greedy’s results when the number of planes increases (reading the
graph from right to left), almost catching up to it despite operating in a dis-
tributed manner.
Figure 9b shows that, unsurprisingly, d-workload achieves comparatively
worse results as the spatial distribution of requests becomes sparser. This is
due to two reasons. First, because the more spread request are, the more UAVs
will ﬂy apart, and the lower chances to coordinate because of the communication
range limit. Second, because workload methods exploit the spatial correlation
between requests: if requests are more spread, this means that there is a lower
spatial correlation between them, and hence the workload heuristic becomes
worse. Finally, the previous section showed that d-independent works compar-
atively better when the requests are uniformly distributed. This works at its
favor when the spread increases. However, being distributed mechanism it is
also negatively aﬀected by the ﬁrst reason above. As a consequence, the relative
performance of d-independent varies unpredictably when the spread changes.
In Figure 9c we can observe that, as the communication range increases, the
distributed methods’ results approach those of the centralized ones. This is be-
cause, as the communication range grows, the UAVs have more opportunities to
coordinate. There is an exception in the case of d-independent and a high com-
munication range. In this case, a larger communication range actually worsens
the results, because it causes the planes to stay very spread out, thus dealing
much worse especially in the low spread scenarios. In contrast, d-workload ends
up achieving very close (less than 1% worse) results to those of c-greedy in the
largest range we tested.
Finally, Figure 9d also shows some interesting behaviors. On the one hand,
d-independent becomes better as the sharpness increases. This is because UAVs
that coordinate with this method tend to evenly split the covered space between
them. Hence, the more requests there are at the same time, the better its
outcome. In contrast, c-greedy and d-workload try to be more clever than that,
which pays oﬀ better when there are less requests than when the system is
overloaded. This is even more noticeable with the workload-based methods.
Recall that the main strength of such methods is to prepare for future requests.
However, high sharpness scenarios reward better plans for the current requests
than better predictions about the future.
Given that the only state-of-the-art method that satisﬁes all our problem’s
constrains is d-independent, these graphs show a very interesting ﬁgure: d-
workload outperforms d-independent on all scenarios, lowering the average ser-
vice time between 36 s (16%) and 18 s (6%). Hence d-workload becomes the
method of choice for the limited range online routing problem. Moreover, in
our experiments d-workload closes between 25% and 100% of the gap exist-
ing between d-workload and the state-of-the-art centralized c-greedy algorithm.
Finally, these results imply that, in the face of highly dynamic situations, it be-
22
comes more important to properly capture the distribution of incoming requests
(as d-workload does) than to compute better plans for the currently known ones
(as c-greedy does).
9. Conclusions and future work
This paper introduced the limited-range online routing problem, which re-
quires that UAVs coordinate to serve requests submitted by external operators.
To tackle this problem, we employed an MRF-based solution instead of the
more common market-based approaches. Using a novel encoding of the prob-
lem and the max-sum algorithm, we showed that this approach can functionally
mimic the operation of a decentralized parallel single-auctions approach. While
the re-discovery of a method on top of a diﬀerent theoretical foundation may
seem irrelevant, it is a signiﬁcant result in our case. Namely, the MRF-based
approach provides an easily extensible framework where the PSI method does
not. Particularly, in this work we have shown that it is possible to introduce
new factors to represent the workload of each UAV while maintaining low com-
putational and communication requirements. Empirical evaluation shows that
the improved version achieves up to 16% lower service times than the single-
auctions approach. Moreover, the actual performance comes very close to that
of employing state-of-the-art centralized SSI auctions. Because of the commu-
nication range limit, centralized SSI auctions can not be implemented in the
real-world. Therefore, our workload-based mechanism stands as a good choice
for robust decentralized coordination with a communication range limit.
In the future, we would like to improve our approach and allocation methods
in two ways. Firstly, we would like to allow for planes to notify the operators
when their tasks are completed. This could be achieved by introducing new tasks
into the system that represent such notiﬁcations. Also, some further signaling
would be required to avoid losing tasks when a UAV fails (and hence disappears
along with those tasks it is carrying). Secondly, we envision better cost functions
for the UAVs. A clear improvement in that front would be to better consider the
actual paths UAVs will follow while completing tasks [30]. Likewise, it would be
desirable to introduce additional factors in the cost function to better control
the spread of UAVs throughout space, as well as the need for UAVs to visit
operators regularly to allow them to introduce new tasks in the system.
Acknowledgements
Work partially funded by projects Collectiveware (TIN2015-66863-C2-1-R)
and RASO (TIN2015-71799-C2-1-P).
References
[1] D. Kingston, R. W. Beard, R. S. Holt, Decentralized perimeter surveillance
using a team of UAVs, IEEE Transactions on Robotics 24 (6) (2008) 1394–
1404.
23
[2] T. H. Cox, C. J. Nagy, M. A. Skoog, I. A. Somers, R. Warner, Overview
of the civil UAV assessment document, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/
dryden/pdf/111760main_UAV_Assessment_Report_Overview.pdf
(2005).
[3] N. R. C. Steering Committee for the Decadal Survey of Civil Aeronau-
tics, Decadal Survey of Civil Aeronautics: Foundation for the Future, The
National Academies Press, 2006.
[4] R. Zlot, A. Stentz, M. B. Dias, S. Thayer, Multi-robot exploration con-
trolled by a market economy, in: IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation., Vol. 3, 2002, pp. 3016–3023.
[5] Y. Weiss, W. T. Freeman, On the optimality of solutions of the max-
product belief-propagation algorithm in arbitrary graphs, IEEE Transac-
tions on Information Theory 47 (2) (2001) 736–744.
[6] M. Vinyals, Exploiting the structure of Distributed Constraint Optimiza-
tion Problems to assess and bound coordinated actions in Multi-Agent
Systems, Ph.D. Thesis, 2011.
[7] A. Rogers, A. Farinelli, R. Stranders, N. R. Jennings, Bounded approxi-
mate decentralised coordination via the max-sum algorithm, Artiﬁcial In-
telligence 175 (2) (2011) 730–759.
[8] M. Pujol-Gonzalez, J. Cerquides, P. Meseguer, J. A. Rodr´ ıguez-Aguilar,
M. Tambe, Engineering the decentralized coordination of uavs with lim-
ited communication range, in: Advances in Artiﬁcial Intelligence: 15th
Conference of the Spanish Association for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, CAEPIA
2013, Madrid, Spain, September 17-20, 2013. Proceedings, Springer, 2013,
pp. 199–208. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-40643-0_21 .
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-40643-0_21
[9] B. P. Gerkey, M. J. Matari´ c, A formal analysis and taxonomy of task alloca-
tion in multi-robot systems, The International Journal of Robotics Research
23 (9) (2004) 939–954.
[10] M. B. Dias, A. Stentz, A free market architecture for distributed control
of a multirobot system, in: 6th International Conference on Intelligent
Autonomous Systems (IAS-6), 2000, pp. 115–122.
[11] B. P. Gerkey, M. J. Mataric, Sold!: Auction methods for multirobot co-
ordination, IEEE Transactions on Robotics and Automation 18 (5) (2002)
758–768.
[12] M. B. Dias, R. Zlot, N. Kalra, A. Stentz, Market-based multirobot coor-
dination: A survey and analysis, Proceedings of the IEEE 94 (7) (2006)
1257–1270.
24
[13] R. K. Dash, P. Vytelingum, A. Rogers, E. David, N. R. Jennings, Market-
based task allocation mechanisms for limited-capacity suppliers, IEEE
Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics - Part A: Systems and
Humans 37 (3) (2007) 391–405. doi:10.1109/TSMCA.2007.893474.
[14] D. P. Bertsekas, The auction algorithm: A distributed relaxation method
for the assignment problem, Annals of operations research 14 (1) (1988)
105–123.
[15] H. W. Kuhn, The hungarian method for the assignment problem, Naval
research logistics quarterly 2 (1-2) (1955) 83–97.
[16] S. Koenig, P. Keskinocak, C. Tovey, Progress on agent coordination with
cooperative auctions, in: Proc. AAAI, Vol. 10, 2010, pp. 1713–1717.
[17] S. Koenig, C. Tovey, M. Lagoudakis, V. Markakis, D. Kempe, P. Ke-
skinocak, A. Kleywegt, A. Meyerson, S. Jain, The power of sequential
single-item auctions for agent coordination, in: Proceedings of the National
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Vol. 21, Menlo Park, CA; Cambridge,
MA; London; AAAI Press; MIT Press; 1999, 2006, p. 1625.
[18] M. G. Lagoudakis, E. Markakis, D. Kempe, P. Keskinocak, A. J. Kleywegt,
S. Koenig, C. A. Tovey, A. Meyerson, S. Jain, Auction-based multi-robot
routing., in: Robotics: Science and Systems, 2005.
[19] M. Alighanbari, J. P. How, Decentralized task assignment for unmanned
aerial vehicles, in: IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, IEEE, 2005,
pp. 5668–5673.
[20] Z. Li, Z. Duan, G. Chen, L. Huang, Consensus of multiagent systems and
synchronization of complex networks: a uniﬁed viewpoint, IEEE Transac-
tions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers 57 (1) (2010) 213–224.
[21] A. R. Mosteo, L. Montano, M. G. Lagoudakis, Multi-robot routing un-
der limited communication range, in: IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation, IEEE, 2008, pp. 1531–1536.
[22] W. Ren, R. Beard, Cooperative ﬁre monitoring with multiple UAVs, in:
Distributed Consensus in Multi-vehicle Cooperative Control, Communi-
cations and Control Engineering, Springer London, 2008, pp. 247–264.
doi:doi:10.1007/978-1-84800-015-5_13 .
[23] W. Zhao, Q. Meng, P. W. H. Chung, A heuristic distributed task allocation
method for multivehicle multitask problems and its application to search
and rescue scenario, IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics 46 (4) (2016) 902–
915. doi:10.1109/TCYB.2015.2418052.
[24] H.-L. Choi, L. Brunet, J. P. How, Consensus-based decentralized auctions
for robust task allocation, IEEE Transactions on Robotics 25 (4) (2009)
912–926.
25
[25] J. J. Acevedo, B. C. Arrue, J. M. Diaz-Banez, I. Ventura, I. Maza, A. Ollero,
Decentralized strategy to ensure information propagation in area moni-
toring missions with a team of uavs under limited communications, in:
Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS), 2013 International Conference on,
IEEE, 2013, pp. 565–574.
[26] J. Butterﬁeld, O. Jenkins, B. Gerkey, Multi-robot markov random ﬁelds, in:
Proceedings of the international joint conference on Autonomous Agents
and Multiagent Systems, Vol. 3, 2008, pp. 1211–1214.
[27] D. Tarlow, I. E. Givoni, R. S. Zemel, HOP-MAP : Eﬃcient Message Pass-
ing with High Order Potentials, in: International Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence and Statistics, Vol. 9, 2010, pp. 812–819.
[28] M. Pujol-Gonzalez, J. Cerquides, P. Meseguer, MASPlanes: A multi-agent
simulation environment to investigate decentralised coordination for teams
of UAVs (demonstration), in: The 13th International Conference on Au-
tonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, International Foundation for
Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, 2014, pp. 1695–1696.
[29] F. Wilcoxon, Individual comparisons by ranking methods, Biometrics bul-
letin 1 (6) (1945) 80–83.
[30] M. Niendorf, P. T. Kabamba, A. R. Girard, Stability of solutions to classes
of traveling salesman problems, IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics 46 (4)
(2016) 973–985. doi:10.1109/TCYB.2015.2418737.
Appendix
Lemma 1. Let f(x1,...,x n) be a factor over binary variables x1,...,x n. Let
g(xi) =γixi be another factor deﬁned only over variable xi. Let h(x1,...,x n) =
f(x1,...,x n) +g(xi) be the factor obtained by adding factors f and g. Let
µf→xj (xj,ν 1,...,ν n) = min
X−j

f (X) +
∑
k⁄=j
νkxk

 (.1)
and
νf→xj (ν1,...,ν n) =
=µf→xj (1,ν 1,...,ν n)−µf→xj (0,ν 1,...,ν n) (.2)
Then we have that:
νh→xj (ν1,...,ν n) =
=
{
νf→xj (ν1,...,ν i +γi,...,ν n) j⁄=i
νf→xj (ν1,...,ν i +γi,...,ν n) +γi j =i (.3)
Proof. see the suplementary material.
26
In terms of the Max-Sum algorithm, this means that if we can eﬃciently
compute the messages ﬂowing out of f, we can also eﬃciently compute the
messages ﬂowing out of h.
Lemma 2. Letf be a factor over binary variablesY ={y1,...,y n}. Let g(Y) =∑n
i=1γiyi be another factor deﬁned as the addition of a set of n independent
factors, one over each variable yi. Let h(Y) = f(Y) + g(Y) be the factor
obtained by adding f and g. Let
µf→yj (yj,ν 1,...,ν n) = min
Y−j

f (Y) +
∑
k⁄=j
νkyk

,
and
νf→yj (ν1,...,ν n) =
=µf→yj (1,ν 1,...,ν n)−µf→yj (0,ν 1,...,ν n).
We have that
νh→yj (ν1,...,ν n) = νf→yj (ν1 +γ1,...,ν n +γn) +γj.
Proof. see the supplementary material.
27
Figure 4: Example hot spots requests
distribution.
100 101 102 103 104
k
1.00
1.12
1.26
1.41
1.58
1.78
2.00α
115
120
125
130
135
140
145
150
155
Avg. service time (s)
Figure 5: Parameter exploration in the hot spots
scenarios.
c-hungarian c-independent c-greedy c-workload
340
360
380
400
420
440Avg. service time (s)
(a) uniform scenario
120
140
160
180
200Avg. service time (s) (b) hot spots scenario
Figure 6: Eﬀects of the spatial distribution of requests. Error bars show the standard error
of the mean.
c-independent d-independent c-workload d-workload
340
360
380
400
420
440
460Avg. service time (s)
(a) uniform scenario
110
120
130
140
150
160Avg. service time (s) (b) hot spots scenario
Figure 7: Impact of distributed solving.
28
1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0
alpha
2750
2800
2850
2900
2950
3000
3050mean service time
α exploration
1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0
alpha
1800
1850
1900
1950
2000
2050
2100
2150median service time
Figure 8: Exploration of α values.
d-independent c-workload d-workload
Low Mid High
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Avg. service time
(% over c-greedy)
(a) Load
Low Mid High
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Avg. service time
(% over c-greedy) (b) Spread
Low Mid High
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Avg. service time
(% over c-greedy)
(c) Communication Range
Low Mid High
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Avg. service time
(% over c-greedy) (d) Time distribution Sharpness
Figure 9: Main eﬀects plots (percentage w.r.t. c-greedy).
29