sensors
Article
Machine Learning-Based IoT-Botnet Attack Detection
with Sequential Architecture †
Yan Naung Soe 1,2, *
 , Yaokai Feng 3,*, Paulus Insap Santosa 2
 , Rudy Hartanto 2
and Kouichi Sakurai 1
1 Department of Informatics, Kyushu University, Fukuoka 819-0395, Japan; sakurai@inf.kyushu-u.ac.jp
2 Department of Electrical and Information Engineering, Universitas Gadjah Mada,
Yogyakarta 55281, Indonesia; insap@ugm.ac.id (P .I.S.); rudy@ugm.ac.id (R.H.)
3 Department of Advanced Information Technology, Kyushu University, Fukuoka 819-0395, Japan
* Correspondence: yan.naung.s@mail.ugm.ac.id (Y.N.S.); fengyk@ait.kyushu-u.ac.jp (Y.F.)
† This manuscript is extension version of the conference paper: Soe, Y.N; Feng, Y.; Santosa, P .I.; Hartanto, R.;
Sakurai, K. A Sequential Scheme for Detecting Cyber Attacks in IoT Environment. In Proceedings of the 4th
IEEE Cyber Science and Technology Congress, Fukuoka, Japan, 5–8 August 2019.
Received: 28 June 2020; Accepted: 3 August 2020; Published: 5 August 2020
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045/gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Abstract: With the rapid development and popularization of Internet of Things (IoT) devices,
an increasing number of cyber-attacks are targeting such devices. It was said that most of the attacks
in IoT environments are botnet-based attacks. Many security weaknesses still exist on the IoT devices
because most of them have not enough memory and computational resource for robust security
mechanisms. Moreover, many existing rule-based detection systems can be circumvented by attackers.
In this study, we proposed a machine learning (ML)-based botnet attack detection framework with
sequential detection architecture. An eﬃcient feature selection approach is adopted to implement a
lightweight detection system with a high performance. The overall detection performance achieves
around 99% for the botnet attack detection using three diﬀerent ML algorithms, including artiﬁcial
neural network (ANN), J48 decision tree, and Naïve Bayes. The experiment result indicates that
the proposed architecture can eﬀectively detect botnet-based attacks, and also can be extended with
corresponding sub-engines for new kinds of attacks.
Keywords: IoT; botnets; machine learning; IDS; feature selection
1. Introduction
1.1. Background and Motivation
The Internet of Things (IoT) devices have been rapidly developing in recent years, and it makes
our daily activities more convenient. The Cisco report [1] expressed that mobile traﬃc will grow up
to 49 exabytes per month by 2021. The average of IoT devices was attacked once every two minutes,
according to the Symantec report [2]. According to the Kaspersky report [3], they could collect 121,588
malware samples for IoT devices in 2018, around four times more than in 2017. Many of such malware
is strong and dangerous to IoT devices. For instance, BASHLILE and Mirai are two typical IoT malware,
and they infected many IoT devices, including making them accessible with vulnerabilities and known
authentication credentials. BASHLILE, is also called Gafgyt, was reported in 2015; its successor, called
Mirai, was reported in 2016. The infected devices will scan to identify the next possible vulnerable
device and report to the central database [4]. About 2.5 million IoT devices were reportedly infected
with Mirai in 2016 [4].
Many studies are trying to protect against these botnet attacks on the IoT environment. However,
there are many gaps still existing to develop an eﬀective detection mechanism. An intrusion detection
Sensors 2020, 20, 4372; doi:10.3390/s20164372 www.mdpi.com /journal/sensors
Sensors 2020, 20, 4372 2 of 15
system (IDS) is one of the e ﬃcient ways to deal with attacks. However, the traditional IDSs are
often not able to be deployed for the IoT environments due to the resource constraint problem of
these devices. The complex cryptographic mechanisms cannot be embedded in many IoT devices
either for the same reason. There are mainly two kinds of IDSs: the anomaly and misuse approaches.
The misuse-based, also called the signature-based, approach, is based on the attacks’ signatures, and
they can also be found in most public IDSs, speciﬁcally Snort [5] and Suricata [6]. Formally, the attacker
can easily circumvent the signature-based approaches, and these mechanisms cannot guarantee to
detect the unknown attacks and the variances of known attacks. The anomaly-based systems are
based on normal data and can support to identify the unknown attacks. However, the diﬀerent nature
of IoT devices is being faced with the di ﬃculty of collecting common normal data. The machine
learning-based detection can guarantee detection of not only the known attacks and their variances.
Therefore, we proposed a machine learning-based botnet attack detection architecture. We also adopted
a feature selection method to reduce the demand for processing resources for performing the detection
system on resource constraint devices. The experiment results indicate that the detection accuracy
of our proposed system is high enough to detect the botnet attacks. Moreover, it can support the
extension for detecting the new distinct kinds of attacks.
1.2. Challenging Issues
The traditional attack detection systems cannot be competently relocated in the IoT environments
because of the diﬀerent nature of such devices, and the diverse architecture of the underlying network
methodologies with the conventional network. Additionally, the possible attacks can be distinct from
the attacks that are found on the traditional network devices. The heavyweight encryption methods
cannot be deployed on these resource constraint devices. On the other side, the IoT devices become very
cheap to set up for personal usages, like in small business and smart home appliances. The attackers
were launching the attacks to the victim nodes after infecting the botnets on these devices. They can
also circumvent formal rule-based detection systems. Although the machine learning-based system
can detect the variances of the many kinds of attacks, the new distinct kinds of attacks can be launched
sometimes. Additionally, the complex processing of ML classiﬁers is a challenge to implement the
lightweight attack detection system on the resource constraint devices.
1.3. Our Contributions
In this study, our main contributions are as follows.
(1) A botnet attacks detection framework with sequential architecture based on machine learning
(ML) algorithms is proposed for dealing with attacks in IoT environments.
(2) A correlated-feature selection approach is adopted for reducing the irrelevant features,
which makes the system lightweight.
(3) In our proposal, classiﬁers based on diﬀerent ML algorithms may be applied in diﬀerent attack
detection sub-engines, which leads to better detection performance and shorter processing times
and a lightweight implementation.
1.4. Organization of the Paper
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: the related works of this study are included in
Section 2, the background methodologies are shown in Section 3, the proposed detection architecture
is explained in Section 4, and the detailed experiment results are expressed in Section 5. Finally,
we conclude this study in Section 6.
2. Related Works
In recent years, many researchers are focusing more on the detection system for the IoT environment
because the botnets attacks are targeting these devices. Network intrusion detection is one of the
Sensors 2020, 20, 4372 3 of 15
eﬀective mechanisms to protect against malicious activities on the networks. Most of the public
detection systems are based on the attacks’ signatures, which can be found as signature-based detection
systems. These systems can detect known attacks by matching incoming attack patterns with the
pre-recorded attack patterns. These systems cannot be lightweight because there are many signatures
rules needed to be added in their databases. One of the popular detection systems, Snort [5], is also
a signature-based system and uses attack signature rules to detect the cyber-attacks. They use a
pattern-search algorithm, called Aho Corasick [7] to decide the incoming traﬃc pattern as attacks or
not. Another detection system, Suricata [ 8], is a popular public IDS, fully supports multithreading
architecture, and is more suitable for large-scale network systems. The study [9] used the Suricata to
implement the detection system on the resource constraint device, Raspberry Pi. They aim to detect
the port scanning attack on the IoT environment. The other studies [10,11] also proposed the attack
detection system for the IoT environment, and they focused on port scanning, MITM, DNS cache
poisoning, and ﬂood attacks. The study [ 6] mentioned that Snort is lighter than Suricata. They also
proposed the machine learning-based detection framework to extend the Snort system. Their results
indicated that the detection results of their extension are better than the original Snort.
The study [12] proposed the multiple ANN-based attack detection method to improve the detection
accuracy. Their experiments indicated that their proposed architecture could reduce the false-negative
rate, even though it may increase the false-positive rate. The dataset, NSL-KDD, which was used in the
experiments, is formally recognized for the traditional network attack detection system. The study [13]
proposed a framework to select the eﬀective machine learning algorithm for identifying malicious
activities in IoT environments. They mentioned that naïve Bayes is an e ﬀective algorithm for the
anomaly detection system in their experiments. The other study [14] proposed a cyber-attack detection
system for sinkhole attacks that were targeting the IoT devices. They got the detection accuracy, 92%
on ﬁxed, and 72% on mobile scenarios with their study. The study [15] proposed the battery exhausted
prevention system on the Bluetooth low energy (BLE), mask network. The other study [16] proposed
a distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attack detection mechanism on the big data situation. The
studies [17,18] also proposed the entropy-based DDoS attack measurement on packet size interval and
the method to locate the potential DDoS attack by the SDN network. Most of the studies mentioned
above also tried to detect the cyber-attacks on IoT. However, these were mostly focusing on the
detection system for speciﬁc types of threats targeting IoT environments.
The study [19] proposed the intrusion detection system for fog computing, and their proposal
was based on the multilayer perceptron (MLP). Their experiments with two datasets [20,21] achieved
the 94% accuracy with ADFA-LD and 74% accuracy with ADFA-WD. Basically, the MLP is a type of
artiﬁcial neural network, and it is heavier than some other classiﬁers. Moreover, the new distinct
kinds of attacks can be launched sometimes although the machine learning-based system can have
reliable accuracy.
The preliminary of the sequential attack detection work [ 22] was also based on the machine
learning methodology. An artiﬁcial neural network (ANN) architecture was applied to detect the
botnets’ attacks. The experiment results indicated that the simple ANN architecture was enough to
recognize the botnets’ attacks with this sequential architecture. We found that the detection performance
is the best if the rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU) function [23] was applied on hidden nodes, and the sigmoid
function [23] was assigned on the output node. In this study, we extend our previous work with a
feature selection method to reduce the high resource demand for further lightweight detection systems.
We also propose the extensible botnet attacks detection framework, and we compare the evaluation
results with diﬀerent machine learning algorithms.
3. Background Methodologies
The network intrusion detection (NIDS) is one of the essential mechanisms to protect against
malicious behavior on network-connected devices, like in an IoT environment. However, most of
the detection systems are signature-based. It is diﬃcult to detect new kinds of attacks even if these
Sensors 2020, 20, 4372 4 of 15
attacks are just the variances of the known attacks because these are used as the pre-recorded attacks’
signatures to identify the incoming network traﬃc pattern is an attack or not. That is, the machine
learning-based techniques become the practical way to detect not only the known attacks but also their
variances. In this study, we applied the popular machine learning methodologies, such as the artiﬁcial
neural network (ANN), J48, and naïve Bayes. Moreover, the proposed system adopted the well-known
feature selection algorithm, the correlation-based feature selection (CFS).
3.1. Artiﬁcial Neural Network (ANN)
The artiﬁcial neural network (ANN) is a basic structure of the neural network methodology. It is a
computational model that is based on biological neural networks. However, it is a practical model
for learning vector-valued functions [23]. The elements, also called neurons, are working in parallel,
and these are connected with each other. A subgroup, dealing with the elements which are connected
via the links, is called the layer. The layers basically include the input, hidden, and output layers.
Each connecting link possesses the related weights, but these are needed to adjust to having optimal
weight values by the backward calculation phases. Thus, the activation function becomes the critical
role model to get these optimal weight vectors. The popular activations, such as sigmoid, ReLU,
and tanh functions, are shown in Equations (1)–(3), respectively.
f (x) = 1
1 + e−x (1)
f (x) = sin h(x)
cos h(x) = ex− ex−x
ex + e−x (2)
f (x) = max(0, x) =
{
x, x≥ 0
0, x < 0 (3)
3.2. J48 Algorithm
J48, also called C4.5, is the descendant of the ID3 algorithm, which is developed by Ross
Quinlan [24]. It is a tree-based algorithm that consists of the root node, and leave nodes are derived
from the root. The tree is constructed by calculating the information gain and entropy values for all
of the attribute values. It is a popular classiﬁcation algorithm, and also it can handle uncompleted
data points, continuous and discrete values. It can avoid the overﬁtting problem because of the
pruning techniques.
3.3. Naïve Bayes
The naïve Bayes classiﬁer provides features-learning, which is independent with the given class,
and it represents using and learning probabilistic knowledge. It is also designed to be used in a
supervised manner, like the decision tree algorithms. It is based on the Bayesian theorem and is
particularly suited when the dimensionality of the input is high. It can often outperform a more
sophisticated classiﬁcation result, although its theory is simple. Moreover, the prediction time is
independent of the number of instances, although the learning time is linear to the number of cases [24].
3.4. Correlation-Based Feature Selection
The feature selection process is for selecting the most important features or selecting the irrelevant
features from all original features. Although the unnecessary features are removed, the features should
oﬀset the accuracy of a predictive model [25]. Although the ﬁlter-based features selection approaches
are much lighter than the wrapper and embedded approaches, the selection method should match
with the learning algorithms. The correlation-based feature selection algorithm is also a ﬁlter-based
algorithm, and it bases on its own merit function. Its function is for evaluating the relations between
input and output variables [26]. Though it is a simple technique, and it is eﬃcient for evaluating the
Sensors 2020, 20, 4372 5 of 15
relations with the output variable and the uncorrelation with each feature. Thus, it cannot seriously
aﬀect the processing accuracy when it is dropped. This algorithm is claimed to be able to accomplish
feature selection for classiﬁcation on the correlation between features and classes. The studies [ 27,28]
showed that the irrelevant features, redundant information also should be eliminated. The CFS
algorithm is based on its merit function, and it can decide the best feature set that contains features
highly correlated with the class, and also uncorrelated with each other. The original work of this
approach can be found in [29]. Due to the lightweight processing purpose, the irrelevant or redundant
features should be ignored. Basically, the many irrelevant features can also undesirably a ﬀect the
processing accuracy. The best features set can be extracted with the highest merit that can compute it
by using Equation (4). Where, k is the number of features in the current subset, rc f is the average value
of all “feature-class” correlations, and r f f is the average value of all “feature-feature” correlations.
MSk =
krc f
√
k + k(k− 1)r f f
(4)
4. Our Proposal: Sequential Attack Detection Architecture
There are mainly two phases in the proposed attack detection architecture, as shown in Figure 1.
The ﬁrst phase is the “Model Builder” to perform (i) data collection, (ii) data categorization, (iii) model
training, and (iv) feature selection. In the “Data Collector,” it is needed to collect the benign data and
the attacks data from the network, like in the IoT environment. The next module is “Data Categorizer”;
it categorizes each kind of attack and benign data. Each category includes all data with the same attack
class and benign data. There are eight categories in our experiments because of the eight di ﬀerent
attack classes in the dataset. The module of “Feature Selector,” selects the most relevant features for
each kind of attack class. This module is critical for implementing a lightweight detection system with
high detection performance. The correlation-based feature selection approach will be adopted to select
the relevant feature set for each kind of attack, like FS-1, FS-2, etc. After getting the most relevant
feature sets, the trained model for each kind of attack will be made by the machine learning (ML)
algorithms in the “Model Trainer” module. We tried several ML algorithms, including naïve Bayes, J48,
and artiﬁcial neural network (ANN). As we mentioned [ 29], the ﬁlter-based feature selection methods
are more matched with the ML-based detection systems, and the ﬁlter-based methods are lighter
than other approaches, such as wrapper and embedded approaches. The “Model Selector” module
implements and evaluates multiple diﬀerent ML algorithms and selects the best one according to the
detection accuracy for each of the sub-engines. In this way, diﬀerent sub-engines may have diﬀerent
kinds of classiﬁers using diﬀerent ML algorithms, which makes a hybrid detection architecture.
The module of “Attack Detector” is for detecting the attacks from the incoming network traﬃc.
There are mainly two processes in “Pre-Processor,” packet decoding and feature extraction. Firstly,
the incoming raw traﬃc patterns have to be decoded by preparing the script. It supports to get the
feature data from the raw data. After getting the decoded traﬃc data, the features will be extracted
using the same method as the above-mentioned feature selector module. The “Attack Detector” module
will sequentially perform the attack detection processes. The extracted features will be passed through
each of the sub-engines with a sequential manner to detect the attacks. If the incoming traﬃc pattern is
identiﬁed as a malicious pattern on any sub-engine, the system will generate an alert.
Sensors 2020, 20, 4372 6 of 15
Sensors 2020, 20, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 15 
 
 
Figure 1. The block diagram of the proposed attack detection architecture. 
The module of “Attack Detector” is for detecting the attacks from the incoming network traffic. 
There are mainly two processes in “Pre -Processor,” packet decoding and fea ture extraction. Firstly, 
the incoming raw traffic patterns have to be decoded by preparing the script. It supports to get the 
feature data from the raw data. After getting the decoded traffic data, the features will be extracted 
using the same method as t he above -mentioned feature selector module. The “Attack Detector” 
module will sequentially perform the attack detection processes. The extracted features will be 
passed through each of the sub-engines with a sequential manner to detect the attacks. If the incoming 
traffic pattern is identified as a malicious pattern on any sub-engine, the system will generate an alert. 
5. Experimental Results 
In the experiment, each related feature data is extracted from incoming all packet data, which is 
based on the defin ed features sets for each category. In this phase, a feature selection method is 
applied for the system to be lightweight. It also needs to extract the corresponding features from the 
input traffic pattern as a pre-processing step. After that, this extracted packet data is passed through 
each attack detection sub-engine by the sequential nature. The main phase is the attack detection sub-
engines for the detection of different kinds of attacks in this proposed framework. The detection 
engine in this phase consists of multiple sub-engines, each of which will perform for detecting each 
kind of attack. The number of specific sub-engines is decided according to how many kinds of specific 
attacks have been stored in the training database. This experiment i s mainly focused on detecting 
botnet attacks because most of IoT malware launched these kinds of attack [30,31]. In each of the 
attack detection sub-engines, any kind of machine learning algorithm can be used. If a specific  sub-
engine detects the malicious data, the system will generate the alert for performing future action. If 
it is identified as the benign, the incoming traffic patterns will be passed through to the  dedicated 
sub-engines as sequential nature. Even this architecture is using several sub -engines to filter,  and 
Figure 1. The block diagram of the proposed attack detection architecture.
5. Experimental Results
In the experiment, each related feature data is extracted from incoming all packet data, which
is based on the deﬁned features sets for each category. In this phase, a feature selection method is
applied for the system to be lightweight. It also needs to extract the corresponding features from the
input traﬃc pattern as a pre-processing step. After that, this extracted packet data is passed through
each attack detection sub-engine by the sequential nature. The main phase is the attack detection
sub-engines for the detection of diﬀerent kinds of attacks in this proposed framework. The detection
engine in this phase consists of multiple sub-engines, each of which will perform for detecting each
kind of attack. The number of speciﬁc sub-engines is decided according to how many kinds of speciﬁc
attacks have been stored in the training database. This experiment is mainly focused on detecting
botnet attacks because most of IoT malware launched these kinds of attack [ 30,31]. In each of the
attack detection sub-engines, any kind of machine learning algorithm can be used. If a speciﬁc
sub-engine detects the malicious data, the system will generate the alert for performing future action.
If it is identiﬁed as the benign, the incoming traﬃc patterns will be passed through to the dedicated
sub-engines as sequential nature. Even this architecture is using several sub-engines to ﬁlter, and there
is no need to add additional processing resources because the attack detection processes will perform
separately. Our previous study [29] mentioned that the detection process would only need 8.75 s for
around 5000 incoming/testing data; even the experiment environment was a resource constraint device,
Raspberry Pi. This means that the system may need to take just 1.75 milliseconds to detect a malicious
pattern in each of the speciﬁc sub-engines. Moreover, the system can extend the additional attack
detection sub-engines without any complexity even although our experiments are done by the eight
speciﬁc sub-engines to detect eﬀectively for DDoS attacks that are launched by the IoT botnets.
Sensors 2020, 20, 4372 7 of 15
5.1. Dataset
These experiments are done using the dataset, N-BaIoT [32]. This dataset has a total of 849,234
instances, including 17,936 benign and 831,298 attack instances, which was captured by running
the most dangerous IoT malware such as Mirai and BASHLITE [ 32,33]. ANN was applied for the
experiments with the diﬀerent well-known activation functions. This dataset is public and collected
from an IoT environment, including popular IoT devices [32,33]. It has eight diﬀerent classes of attacks
based on two botnets and one benign and has 115 traﬃc features. The distribution of the instances in
the dataset is shown in Figure 2.
Sensors 2020, 20, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 15 
 
there is no need to add additional processing resources because the attack detection processes will  
perform separately. Our previous study [29] mentioned that the detection process would only need 
8.75 s for around 5000 incoming/testing data; even the experiment environment was a resource 
constraint device, Raspberry Pi. This means that the system may need to take just 1.75 milliseconds 
to detect a malicious pattern in each of the specific sub-engines. Moreover, the system can extend the 
additional attack detection sub-engines without any complexity even although our experiments are 
done by the eight specific sub-engines to detect effectively for DDoS attacks that are launched by the 
IoT botnets. 
5.1. Dataset 
These experiments are done using the dataset, N -BaIoT [32]. This dataset has a total of 849,234 
instances, including 17,936 benign and 831,298 attack instances, which was captured by running the 
most dangerous IoT malware such as Mirai and BASHLITE [32,33]. ANN was applied for the 
experiments with the different well-known activation functions. This dataset is public and collected 
from an IoT enviro nment, including popular IoT devices [32,33]. It has eight different classes of 
attacks based on two botnets and one benign and has 115 traffic features. The distribution of the 
instances in the dataset is shown in Figure 2. 
 
Figure 2. The distribution of the dataset. 
The most well -known malware attacks by far on the IoT environments are Mi rai and Gafgyt 
(BASHLITE). Once a device was infected, it automatically started scanning the network for new 
victims while waiting for instructions from the C & C server. The following lists are the sub-categories 
of these two attacks. There are five attac ks included in the Gafgyt attacks, such as scan, junk, udp, 
tcp, and combo. Besides, there are three more attacks found in the Mirai attack, not only two kinds 
of the first botnet attacks (scan and udp), and also new kinds of three attacks (ack, syn, and udpplain). 
Some other variants of the malware have also launched attacks, like the following categories. 
 Scan: Scanning the network for vulnerable devices. 
 Junk: Sending spam data. 
 Udp: UDP flooding. 
 Tcp: TCP flooding. 
 Combo: Sending spam data and opening a connection to a specified IP address and port. 
 Ack: Ack flooding. 
 Syn: Syn flooding. 
Figure 2. The distribution of the dataset.
The most well-known malware attacks by far on the IoT environments are Mirai and Gafgyt
(BASHLITE). Once a device was infected, it automatically started scanning the network for new victims
while waiting for instructions from the C & C server. The following lists are the sub-categories of
these two attacks. There are ﬁve attacks included in the Gafgyt attacks, such as scan, junk, udp, tcp,
and combo. Besides, there are three more attacks found in the Mirai attack, not only two kinds of
the ﬁrst botnet attacks (scan and udp), and also new kinds of three attacks (ack, syn, and udpplain).
Some other variants of the malware have also launched attacks, like the following categories.
• Scan: Scanning the network for vulnerable devices.
• Junk: Sending spam data.
• Udp: UDP ﬂooding.
• Tcp: TCP ﬂooding.
• Combo: Sending spam data and opening a connection to a speciﬁed IP address and port.
• Ack: Ack ﬂooding.
• Syn: Syn ﬂooding.
• Udp plain: UDP ﬂooding with fewer options, optimized for higher Packets Per Seconds (PPS).
Firstly, the dataset was reorganized by each attack data with benign data. For these categories,
66% of instances are selected as training data and the remaining part of the dataset as validating
data. As the pre-processing step, we used the max–min normalization where the data inputs are
Sensors 2020, 20, 4372 8 of 15
mapped into the range between 0 and 1 [ 34]. We used some python libraries, such as Scikit-learn,
Keras, and Tensorﬂow, to support the implementation of the system.
Scikit-learn: it is the supporting tool to implement many machine learning algorithms
eﬃciently [35]. It also provides the function to split datasets into multiple subsets, including for
splitting the training and test sets. We used this library to split the selected dataset into the training and
testing data. In addition, we used this library to conduct experiments with the tree-based algorithm
and naïve Bayes.
Keras: it is a high-level neural network Python-API, and capable of running on top of the dependencies,
including TensorFlow. It was developed with a focus on enabling fast experimentation [36]. It is running
on the top of the Tensorflow [37]. It can also support multilayer perception.
Tensorﬂow: it is the more complex library for distributed numerical computation using data ﬂow
graphs. It is possible to train and run extensive neural networks e ﬃciently [35]. It was created at
Google, and it is an open-source software library for high-performance numerical computation [38].
It can strongly support machine learning and deep learning for many other scientiﬁc domains.
The diﬀerent activation functions such as sigmoid, Tanh, and ReLU were applied to determine
which one is the best option in the proposed system. The accuracy result comparisons are shown in
Figures 3–5. The accuracy in the experiment was calculated by Equation (5). Where, “TP” is true
positive which indicates the number of attack classes correctly classiﬁed, “TN” is true negative which
indicates the number of benign classes correctly classiﬁed, “FP” is false positive which indicates the
number of benign classes wrongly classiﬁed as an attack, and “FN” is false negative which indicates the
number of attack class wrongly classiﬁed as benign. According to the experiment results, the sigmoid
function gave the best accuracy results.
Accuracy = TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN (5)
Sensors 2020, 20, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 15 
 
 Udp plain: UDP flooding with fewer options, optimized for higher Packets Per Seconds (PPS). 
Firstly, the dataset was reorganized by each attack data with benign data. For these categories, 
66% of instances are selected as training data and the remaining part of the dataset as validating data. 
As the pre-processing step, we used the max–min normalization where the data inputs are mapped 
into the range between 0 and 1 [34]. We used some python libraries, such as Scikit-learn, Keras, and 
Tensorflow, to support the implementation of the system. 
Scikit-learn: it is the supporting tool to implement many machine learning algorithms efficiently 
[35]. It also provides the function to split datasets into multiple subsets, including for splitting the 
training and test sets. We used this library to split the selected dataset into the training and testing 
data. In addition, we used  this library to conduct experiments with the tree -based algorithm and 
naï ve Bayes. 
Keras: it is a high -level neural network Python -API, and capable of running on top of the 
dependencies, including TensorFlow. It was developed with a focus on enabling fast experimentation 
[36]. It is running on the top of the Tensorflow [37]. It can also support multilayer perception. 
Tensorflow: it is the more complex library for distributed numerical computation using data 
flow graphs. It is possible to train and run extensive neural networks efficiently [35]. It was created 
at Google, and it is an open -source software library for high -performance numerical computation 
[38]. It can strongly support machine learning and deep learning for many other scientific domains. 
The different activation functions such as sigmoid, Tanh, and ReLU were applied to determine 
which one is the best option in the proposed system. The accuracy result comparisons are shown in 
Figures 3–5. The accuracy in the experiment was calculated by Eq uation (5). Where, “TP” is true 
positive which indicates the number of attack classes correctly classified, “TN” is true negative which 
indicates the number of benign classes correctly classified, “FP” is false positive which indicates the 
number of benign classes wrongly classified as an attack, and “FN” is false negative which indicates 
the number of attack class wrongly classified as benign. According to the experiment results, the 
sigmoid function gave the best accuracy results. 
𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑦 = ⁡ 𝑇𝑃 + 𝑇𝑁
𝑇𝑃 + 𝑇𝑁 + 𝐹𝑃 + 𝐹𝑁 (5) 
 
Figure 3. Accuracy comparison for detecting Internet of Things (IoT) botnet attacks by a 
simple neural network (sigmoid in the hidden layer and different functions in the output 
layer). 
Figure 3. Accuracy comparison for detecting Internet of Things (IoT) botnet attacks by a simple neural
network (sigmoid in the hidden layer and diﬀerent functions in the output layer).
Sensors 2020, 20, 4372 9 of 15
Sensors 2020, 20, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 15 
 
 
Figure 4. Accuracy comparison for detecting IoT botnets attacks by a simple neural network 
(tanh in the hidden layer and different functions in the output layer). 
 
Figure 5. Accuracy comparison for detecting IoT botnets attacks by a simple neural network 
(ReLU in the hidden layer and different functions in the output layer). 
5.2. The Performance with ANN 
The detection results for the Mirai and Gafgyt attacks using a simple artificial neural network 
are shown in Fig ures 3–5, respectively. In the hidden and output layer, sigmoid or tanh or ReLU 
function is applied.  There are eight sub -engines included in th is experiment by representing 1 for 
ack, 2 for combo, 3 for junk, 4 for scan, 5 for syn, 6 for tcp, 7 for udp, and 8 for udpplain . As the pre-
processing step, we applied the max–min normalization, where the data inputs are mapped into the 
range between 0 and 1 [34]. The max–min normalization approach is shown in Equation (6). 
Figure 4. Accuracy comparison for detecting IoT botnets attacks by a simple neural network (tanh in
the hidden layer and diﬀerent functions in the output layer).
Sensors 2020, 20, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 15 
 
 
Figure 4. Accuracy comparison for detecting IoT botnets attacks by a simple neural network 
(tanh in the hidden layer and different functions in the output layer). 
 
Figure 5. Accuracy comparison for detecting IoT botnets attacks by a simple neural network 
(ReLU in the hidden layer and different functions in the output layer). 
5.2. The Performance with ANN 
The detection results for the Mirai and Gafgyt attacks using a simple artificial neural network 
are shown in Fig ures 3–5, respectively. In the hidden and output layer, sigmoid or tanh or ReLU 
function is applied.  There are eight sub -engines included in th is experiment by representing 1 for 
ack, 2 for combo, 3 for junk, 4 for scan, 5 for syn, 6 for tcp, 7 for udp, and 8 for udpplain . As the pre-
processing step, we applied the max–min normalization, where the data inputs are mapped into the 
range between 0 and 1 [34]. The max–min normalization approach is shown in Equation (6). 
Figure 5. Accuracy comparison for detecting IoT botnets attacks by a simple neural network (ReLU in
the hidden layer and diﬀerent functions in the output layer).
5.2. The Performance with ANN
The detection results for the Mirai and Gafgyt attacks using a simple artiﬁcial neural network are
shown in Figures 3–5, respectively. In the hidden and output layer, sigmoid or tanh or ReLU function is
applied. There are eight sub-engines included in this experiment by representing 1 for ack, 2 for combo,
3 for junk, 4 for scan, 5 for syn, 6 for tcp, 7 for udp, and 8 for udpplain. As the pre-processing step,
we applied the max–min normalization, where the data inputs are mapped into the range between 0
and 1 [34]. The max–min normalization approach is shown in Equation (6).
z = x− min(x)
max(x)− min(x) (6)
Sensors 2020, 20, 4372 10 of 15
The experiment results indicate that the detection performance is the best if the detection model
used the sigmoid activation function for the output layer. All of the detection accuracy using the sigmoid
action function at the output layer is up to 99%. Although the conﬁguration of the Tanh activation
function at the output layer is better than the conﬁguration of the ReLU activation function, some of the
results are not stable and are lower than the conﬁguration of the sigmoid action function at the hidden
layer. Even though the activation functions were changed at the hidden layer, it can be observed that
the output has no clear diﬀerence from each other. According to the results, the conﬁguration of the
sigmoid activation function at the output layer yielded the most accurate results, and it could apply
any activation functions at the hidden layer without sacriﬁcing detection accuracy. However, the ReLU
activation function will be applied for the hidden layer because this function is lighter than the other
two, and it does not need the calculation of the exponential values.
5.3. Comparison with Diﬀerent Learning Algorithms
Firstly, we evaluated the performance of our proposed detection architecture by removing the
feature selector module. The detection results of ANN’s and other algorithms are compared in Table 1.
According to the evaluation mentioned above results (in Figures 3–5) between diﬀerent activation on
ANN, the performance comparisons were completed with ReLU function in the hidden layer and
sigmoid function in the output layer because it is the best choice for the system to be lightweight
and more accurate. The Naïve Bayes (NB) supports the 85.81 for ack, 77.33 for combo, 61.52 for junk,
76.11 for scan, 87.08 for syn, 84.57 for tcp, 85.18 for udp, and 82.49 for udpplain attacks, respectively.
The detection results are not too good, especially in junk attack detection. However, the detection
results of J48 and simple ANN are signiﬁcantly better than that of NB, and also these are good enough
for detecting the diﬀerent kinds of IoT botnets attacks. The J48 results are 99.01 for ack, 99.01 for combo,
99.08 for junk, 99.05 for scan, 99.08 for syn, 99.05 for tcp, 98.99 for udp, and 99.09 for udpplain attacks.
The ANN results are also high enough, such as 99.01 for ack, 99 for junk, 98.98 for scan, 99.01 for syn,
98.95 for tcp, 98.97 for udp, and 99 for udpplain attacks. The results show that ANN (ReLU in the
hidden layer and sigmoid in the output layer) and J48 are signiﬁcantly better than the NB algorithm.
Table 1. Detection accuracy without feature selector.
Classiﬁer Ack Combo Junk Scan Syn T cp Udp Udpplain
NB 85.81 77.33 61.52 76.11 87.08 84.57 85.18 82.49
J48 99.01 99.01 99.08 99.05 99.08 99.05 98.99 99.09
ANN 99.01 99.00 98.98 98.98 99.01 98.95 98.97 99.00
The performance results of the proposed attack detection architecture using the feature selector
module are shown in Table 2. In this architecture, the feature selection method is adopted to reduce the
irrelevant features from the dataset. We also evaluated our detection architecture by NB, J48, and ANN.
The feature selection processes were completed by the best merit values of each class; 0.996 for ack,
0.995 for combo, 0.994 for junk, 0.99 for scan, 0.996 for syn, 0.995 for tcp, 0.995 for udp, and 0.996 for
udpplain attacks. The detection results show that there are no diﬀerences between using all features
and using selected features with J48 and ANN even signiﬁcantly reduced the number of features from
the original 115 features.
Table 2. Detection accuracy with feature selector.
Classiﬁer Ack Combo Junk Scan Syn T cp Udp Udpplain
NB 99.09 99.09 99.10 97.34 99.01 98.99 98.97 99.10
J48 99.10 99.07 99.08 98.80 98.99 98.98 98.99 99.09
ANN 99.01 98.98 98.99 98.71 98.90 98.89 98.90 99.00
Sensors 2020, 20, 4372 11 of 15
Moreover, the results of selected features with NB are signiﬁcantly better than the results using all
features, and these results can be comparable with the results of the other two algorithms, J48 and ANN.
With the proposed detection architecture, the detection results of NB reached up to 99.09 for ack, 99.09
for combo, 99.1 for junk, 97.34 for scan, 99.1 for syn, 98.99 for tcp, 98.97 for udp, and 99.1 for udpplain,
respectively. According to the performance results with di ﬀerent three algorithms, our proposed
detection is suitable for detection of botnets attacks in the IoT environment. Moreover, our proposed
architecture has no limit to extend additional detection engines for future challengeable attacks.
5.4. Performance of the Proposed Detection Architecture
We compared the detection accuracy between the formal detection scheme using di ﬀerent
classiﬁers, and our proposed detection scheme with a hybrid classiﬁcation is shown in Figure 6.
For the formal detection scheme, we used di ﬀerent machine learning algorithms, such as NB, J48,
or ANN. In this detection scheme, a machine learning algorithm is needed to classify whether the
incoming pattern is an attack or not. In our scheme (described in Figure 1), we proposed the sequential
detection architecture with diﬀerent attack detection engines with the “hybrid classiﬁcation.” Each of
the sub-engines need to be assigned with the most suitable classiﬁer, and the selected classiﬁers can
be diﬀerent in each engine to have the best detection performance. For this purpose, we found the
most suitable classiﬁer for each sub-engine by comparing the accuracy values (which are based on
Equation (5)).
Sensors 2020, 20, x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 of 15 
 
 
Figure 6. Comparison of our proposed sequential detection scheme (hybrid classifier) with 
the formal detection scheme (naï ve Bayes (NB), J48, and artificial neural network (ANN)). 
The processing time comparison of our proposed scheme with the formal detection scheme is 
shown in Table 3. Our experiments were done on a personal computer which possesses i7-8565U and 
16 GB RAM. We separated two -thirds of the dataset for the model traine r, and the remaining part 
was for model evaluation. The above-mentioned results in the table are expressed by the processing 
time of the model trainer module for “Training”, and the attack detector module for “Testing”. In the 
formal detection architecture, the model training time of NB and J48 is not too different, but these 
classifiers are lighter than the other classifier, ANN. Moreover, the processing time of attack detection 
with J48 is faster than the other two classifiers in the formal architecture. In addition, the processing 
time of our proposed architecture with the “hybrid” classification is faster than the formal detection 
architecture, in the cases of NB, J48, and ANN. In the proposed architecture, the feature selector 
module could greatly reduce the number of the  original features. Moreover, the model selector 
module could support choosing the classifiers with the best performance, which are based on the 
better detection accuracy and the faster processing time  for each of sub -engines. Therefore, our 
proposed scheme with “hybrid ” classification is lighter and  has better accuracy than the formal 
detection architecture. We also tried the model trainer and attack detector modules with sub-engines 
in parallel. In parallel training, the processing time of the model trainer module is three times faster 
than the serial training. Additionally, the processing of the attack detection module is slightly faster 
than the serial classification, but the running environment is n eeded to support the multithrea ding 
architecture. The experiment results indicate that our proposed scheme is lightweight and has better 
accuracy for the detection of IoT botnets attacks with sequential architecture. 
5.5. Observations 
According to the experimental results, it can be observed that: 
 The proposed architecture, sequential detection scheme with “hybrid” classification, is useful to 
detect the IoT botnets attacks. In Fig ure 6, the average detection accuracy of “hybrid ” 
classification is around 99% in each of the sub-engines. 
 In the construction of neural network architecture, the sigmoid function at the output layer can 
generate the most accurate results by our detection scheme. Even though any activation 
functions can be used at the hidden layer without significantly affecting detection accuracy, the 
Figure 6. Comparison of our proposed sequential detection scheme (hybrid classiﬁer) with the formal
detection scheme (naïve Bayes (NB), J48, and artiﬁcial neural network (ANN)).
The proposed scheme performs the four processes, such as feature selector, model trainer,
and model selector modules to achieve the accuracy values. Firstly, we applied the feature selector
module for recognizing the most relevant features for every attack detection, “sub-engines.” We adopted
the CFS to select the most important features sets for each of the sub-engines, by deciding with its
own merit function. After that, we constructed the attack detecting models by training with diﬀerent
classiﬁers, such as NB, J48, and simple ANN. After getting the trained models, we evaluated these
models to determine which classiﬁer can give the most accurate results. If the two classiﬁers
could perform with the same detection accuracy, the faster detection classiﬁer was applied to our
Sensors 2020, 20, 4372 12 of 15
proposed scheme. That is, our proposed scheme can detect malicious patterns e ﬀectively with
lightweight architecture.
The evaluation results of diﬀerent classiﬁers using the feature selector are described in Table 2.
According to the evaluation results, we assigned the di ﬀerent classiﬁers as “hybrid classiﬁcation”
in diﬀerent sub-engines, i.e., J48 in sub-engine-1, NB in sub-engine-2 and 3, J48 in sub-engine-4, NB in
sub-engine-5 and 6, J48 in sub-engine-7, and NB in sub-engine-8, respectively. The results in Figure 6 show
that our detection scheme is signiﬁcantly better than the formal detection architecture with NB and
ANN classiﬁers. Moreover, the results with our detection scheme are better than the formal detection
scheme with J48, especially in ack, combo, junk, and udpplain. Additionally, the processing time of
our detection scheme is shorter than the formal detection scheme, and the processing time comparison
is shown in Table 3. It just needs 0.03 s to perform the 270,908 samples in the attack detector module.
Table 3. Processing time comparison (seconds).
Classiﬁer Training Testing
NB 16.06 0.44
J48 15.05 0.07
ANN 151.32 9.71
Hybrid (serial) 1.56 0.03
Hybrid (parallel) 0.46 0.02
The processing time comparison of our proposed scheme with the formal detection scheme is
shown in Table 3. Our experiments were done on a personal computer which possesses i7-8565U and
16 GB RAM. We separated two-thirds of the dataset for the model trainer, and the remaining part
was for model evaluation. The above-mentioned results in the table are expressed by the processing
time of the model trainer module for “Training”, and the attack detector module for “Testing”. In the
formal detection architecture, the model training time of NB and J48 is not too di ﬀerent, but these
classiﬁers are lighter than the other classiﬁer, ANN. Moreover, the processing time of attack detection
with J48 is faster than the other two classiﬁers in the formal architecture. In addition, the processing
time of our proposed architecture with the “hybrid” classiﬁcation is faster than the formal detection
architecture, in the cases of NB, J48, and ANN. In the proposed architecture, the feature selector module
could greatly reduce the number of the original features. Moreover, the model selector module could
support choosing the classiﬁers with the best performance, which are based on the better detection
accuracy and the faster processing time for each of sub-engines. Therefore, our proposed scheme
with “hybrid” classiﬁcation is lighter and has better accuracy than the formal detection architecture.
We also tried the model trainer and attack detector modules with sub-engines in parallel. In parallel
training, the processing time of the model trainer module is three times faster than the serial training.
Additionally, the processing of the attack detection module is slightly faster than the serial classiﬁcation,
but the running environment is needed to support the multithreading architecture. The experiment
results indicate that our proposed scheme is lightweight and has better accuracy for the detection of
IoT botnets attacks with sequential architecture.
5.5. Observations
According to the experimental results, it can be observed that:
• The proposed architecture, sequential detection scheme with “hybrid” classiﬁcation, is useful to
detect the IoT botnets attacks. In Figure 6, the average detection accuracy of “hybrid” classiﬁcation
is around 99% in each of the sub-engines.
• In the construction of neural network architecture, the sigmoid function at the output layer
can generate the most accurate results by our detection scheme. Even though any activation
functions can be used at the hidden layer without signiﬁcantly a ﬀecting detection accuracy,
Sensors 2020, 20, 4372 13 of 15
the implementation of the ReLU activation function at the hidden layer is more suitable because
this function is lighter than the other two functions.
• The above-mentioned results show that J48 and NB are lighter than ANN even if the minimum
conﬁguration is done with a single hidden layer and a single output node. Moreover, the detection
accuracy of these three classiﬁers is almost the same in our proposed detection scheme with the
feature selector. Due to the feature selector module, the system got more accurate results and the
lighter processing capability. Especially in the NB classiﬁer, the detection accuracy for junk attack
is dramatically increased up to 99.10% from 61.52%.
• Due to the model selector module, we could assign the most suitable classiﬁer as
“hybrid classiﬁcation” in each of the sub-engines. It supports the system to have the most
accurate results among diﬀerent classiﬁers.
• Our detection can also be extended with additional sub-engines if necessary.
6. Conclusions and Future Work
With the rapid development the IoT technologies, the cyber-attacks are mostly targeting these
devices. Especially, the botnets attacks are vastly challenging in these environments. After infecting
the botnets, the attackers can control these devices via the C & C server and launch attacks to the victim
hosts. Our proposed detection architecture can detect the known attacks and their variances, and also,
the system can be extended to detect the new kinds of upcoming attacks. Moreover, the system
achieved the lightweight nature and the best detection accuracy by applying the feature selection
approach. The hybrid classiﬁcation could also greatly assist with achieving the best accuracy with rapid
detection. In our future work, we will investigate the normal traﬃc patterns on the diﬀerent natures of
IoT devices to extend the anomaly-sub-engine for detecting unknown attacks eﬀectively. Moreover,
we will implement a testbed to validate the performance of our proposed system, and propose how to
isolate the compromised devices.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, Y.N.S., Y.F., P .I.S., R.H., and K.S.; Formal analysis, Y.N.S. and Y.F.;
Methodology, Y.N.S. and Y.F., Project administration, Y.N.S., Y.F., P .I.S., R.H., and K.S.; Software, Y.N.S. and
Y.F.; Supervision, Y.F., P .I.S., R.H., and K.S.; Validation, Y.N.S. and Y.F. All authors have read and agreed to the
published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This work was supported by AUN/SEED-Net Project (JICA). It was also partially supported by Strategic
International Research Cooperative Program, Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST), JSPS KAKENHI Grant
Numbers JP17K00187 and JP18K11295.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Cisco. Cisco Visual Networking Index (VNI) Global Mobile Data Traﬃc Forecast Update, 2017–2022 White Paper;
Cisco Systems Inc.: San Jose, CA, USA, 2019.
2. Symantec Internet Security Threat Report 2019. Volume 24. Available online: https://docs.broadcom.com/
doc/istr-24-2019-en (accessed on 2 January 2020).
3. Kuzin, M.; Shmelev, Y.; Kuskov, V . New Trends in the World of IoT Threats—Securelist Kaspersky Lab.
2018. Available online: https://securelist.com/new-trends-in-the-world-of-iot-threats /87991/ (accessed on
2 January 2020).
4. Marzano, A.; Alexander, D.; Fonseca, O.; Fazzion, E.; Hoepers, C.; Steding-Jessen, K.; Chaves, M.H.; Cunha, I.;
Guedes, D.; Meira, W. The Evolution of Bashlite and Mirai IoT Botnets. In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium
on Computers and Communications, Natal, Brazil, 25–28 June 2018; pp. 813–818.
5. Baker, A.R.; Esler, J. Snort IDS, IPS Toolkit; 30 Corporate, Dr.; Elsevier Inc.: Burlington, MA, USA, 2007;
ISBN 9783540449119.
6. Shah, S.A.R.; Issac, B. Performance comparison of intrusion detection systems and application of machine
learning to Snort system. Futur. Gener. Comput. Syst. 2018, 80, 157–170. [CrossRef]
Sensors 2020, 20, 4372 14 of 15
7. Aho, A.V .; Corasick, M.J. E ﬃcient String Matching: An Aid to Bibliographic Search Commun. ACM
1975, 18, 333–340. [CrossRef]
8. OISF. Suricata User Guide; Open Information Security Foundation: Boston, MA, USA, 2019.
9. Zitta, T.; Neruda, M.; Vojtech, L. The security of RFID readers with IDS/IPS solution using Raspberry Pi.
In Proceedings of the 2017 18th International Carpathian Control Conference (ICCC), Sinaia, Romania, 28–31
May 2017; pp. 316–320.
10. Da Silva Cardoso, A.M.; Lopes, R.F.; Teles, A.S.; Magalhaes, F.B.V . Real-time DDoS detection based on
complex event processing for IoT. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE/ACM Third International Conference on
Internet-of-Things Design and Implementation (IoTDI), Orlando, FL, USA, 17–20 April 2018; pp. 273–274.
11. von Sperling, T.L.; de Caldas Filho, F.L.; de Sousa, R.T.; e Martins, L.M.C.; Rocha, R.L. Tracking intruders in
IoT networks by means of DNS traﬃc analysis. In Proceedings of the 2017 Workshop on Communication
Networks and Power Systems (WCNPS), Brasilia, Brazil, 16–17 November 2017; pp. 1–4.
12. Zhao, H.; Feng, Y.; Koide, H.; Sakurai, K. An ANN Based Sequential Detection Method for Balancing
Performance Indicators of IDS. In Proceedings of the 2019 Seventh International Symposium on Computing
and Networking (CANDAR), Negasaki, Japan, 25–28 November 2019; pp. 239–244.
13. Shaﬁq, M.; Tian, Z.; Sun, Y.; Du, X.; Guizani, M. Selection of eﬀective machine learning algorithm and Bot-IoT
attacks traﬃc identiﬁcation for internet of things in smart city. Futur. Gener. Comput. Syst. 2020, 107, 433–442.
[CrossRef]
14. Cervantes, C.; Poplade, D.; Nogueira, M.; Santos, A. Detection of sinkhole attacks for supporting secure
routing on 6LoWPAN for Internet of Things. In Proceedings of the 2015 IFIP/IEEE International Symposium
on Integrated Network Management (IM), Ottawa, ON, Canada, 11–15 May 2015; pp. 606–611.
15. Guo, Z.; Harris, I.G.; Jiang, Y.; Tsaur, L.F. An e ﬃcient approach to prevent battery exhaustion attack on
BLE-based mesh networks. In Proceedings of the 2017 International Conference on Computing, Networking
and Communications (ICNC), Santa Clara, CA, USA, 26–29 January 2017; pp. 1–5.
16. Jia, B.; Ma, Y.; Huang, X.; Lin, Z.; Sun, Y. A Novel Real-Time DDoS Attack Detection Mechanism Based on
MDRA Algorithm in Big Data. Math. Probl. Eng. 2016, 2016, 1467051. [CrossRef]
17. Singh, K.J.; Thongam, K.; De, T. Entropy-based application layer DDoS attack detection using artiﬁcial
neural networks. Entropy 2016, 18, 350. [CrossRef]
18. Xu, Y.; Liu, Y. DDoS attack detection under SDN context. In Proceedings of the IEEE INFOCOM
2016-the 35th annual IEEE international conference on computer communications, San Francisco, CA,
USA, 10–14 April 2016; pp. 1–9.
19. Khater, B.S.; Wahid, A.; Abdul, B.; Yamani, M.; Bin, I.; Hussain, M.A.; Ibrahim, A.A. A Lightweight
Perceptron-Based Intrusion Detection System for Fog Computing. Appl. Sci. 2019, 9, 178. [CrossRef]
20. Creech, G.; Hu, J. Generation of a new IDS test dataset: Time to retire the KDD collection. In Proceedings of the
2013 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC), Shanghai, China,7–10 April 2013;
pp. 4487–4492.
21. Haider, W.; Creech, G.; Xie, Y.; Hu, J. Windows based data sets for evaluation of robustness of Host based
Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) to zero-day and stealth attacks. Futur. Internet 2016, 8, 29. [CrossRef]
22. Soe, Y.N.; Feng, Y.; Santosa, P .I.; Hartanto, R.; Sakurai, K. A sequential scheme for detecting cyber attacks
in IoT environment. In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE Intl Conf on Dependable, Autonomic and Secure
Computing, Intl Conf on Pervasive Intelligence and Computing, Intl Conf on Cloud and Big Data Computing,
Intl Conf on Cyber Science and Technology Congress (DASC/PiCom/CBDCom/CyberSciTech), Fukuoka,
Japan, 5–8 August 2019; pp. 238–244.
23. Mitchell, T.M. Machine Learning; McGraw-Hill: New York, NY, USA, 1997; ISBN 978-0-07-042807-2.
24. Ashari, A.; Paryudi, I.; Min, A. Performance Comparison between Naïve Bayes, Decision Tree and k-Nearest
Neighbor in Searching Alternative Design in an Energy Simulation Tool. Int. J. Adv. Comput. Sci. Appl.
2013, 4, 33–39. [CrossRef]
25. Kuhn, M.; Johnson, K.Applied Predictive Modeling; Springer: New York, NY , USA, 2013; ISBN 978-1-4614-6848-6.
26. Hall, M. Correlation-based Feature Selection for Machine Learning. Ph.D. Thesis, University of Waikato,
Hamilton, New Zealand, 1999.
27. Kohavi, R.; John, G.H. Wrappers for Feature Subset Selection. Artif. Intell. 1997, 19, 273–324. [CrossRef]
Sensors 2020, 20, 4372 15 of 15
28. Kohavi, R.; Sommerﬁeld, D. Feature Subset Selection Using the Wrapper Method: Overﬁtting and Dynamic
Search Space Topology. In Proceedings of the First International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data
Mining (KDD’95); 1995; pp. 192–197. Available online: https: //openreview.net/forum?id=B1W_OEb_WH
(accessed on 5 August 2020).
29. Soe, Y.N.; Feng, Y.; Santosa, P .I.; Hartanto, R.; Sakurai, K. Implementing Lightweight IoT-IDS on Raspberry
Pi Using Correlation-Based Feature Selection and Its Performance Evaluation Advanced Information
Networking and Applications. In Proceedings of the 33rd International Conference on Advanced Information
Networking and Applications AINA-2019 (Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing), Kunibiki
Messe, Matsue, Japan, 27–29 March 2019; Volume 926, pp. 458–469.
30. Amini, P .; Araghizadeh, M.A.; Azmi, R. A survey on Botnet: Classiﬁcation, detection and defense.
In Proceedings of the 2015 International Electronics Symposium (IES), Surabaya, Indonesia, 29–30 September
2015; pp. 233–238.
31. Hassija, V .; Chamola, V .; Saxena, V .; Jain, D.; Goyal, P .; Sikdar, B. A Survey on IoT Security: Application
Areas, Security Threats, and Solution Architectures. IEEE Access 2019, 7, 82721–82743. [CrossRef]
32. Meidan, Y.; Bohadana, M.; Mathov, Y.; Mirsky, Y.; Breitenbacher, D.; Shabtai, A.; Elovici, Y. N-BaIoT:
Network-based Detection of IoT Botnet Attacks Using Deep Autoencoders. IEEE Pervasive Comput.
2018, 17, 12–22. [CrossRef]
33. Mirsky, Y.; Doitshman, T.; Elovici, Y.; Shabtai, A. Kitsune: An Ensemble of Autoencoders for Online Network
Intrusion Detection. arXiv 2018, arXiv:1802.09089.
34. Ogasawara, E.; Martinez, L.C.; Oliveira DDe Zimbrão, G.; Pappa, G.L.; Mattoso, M. Adaptive Normalization:
A Novel Data Normalization Approach for Non-Stationary Time Series. In Proceedings of the 2010
International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), Barcelona, Spain, 18–23 July 2010; pp. 1–8.
35. Pedregosa, F.; Varoquaux, G.; Gramfort, A.; Michel, V .; Thirion, B.; Grisel, O.; Blondel, M.; Prettenhofer, P .;
Weiss, R.; Dubourg, V .; et al. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python.J. Mach. Learn. Res. 2011, 12, 2825–2830.
36. Chollet, F. Keras 2015 Github Repository. Available online: https://github.com/keras-team/keras (accessed on
1 February 2020).
37. Gulli, A.; Pal, S. Deep Learning with Keras ; Packt Publishing Ltd.: Birmingham, UK, 2017;
ISBN 978-1-78712-842-2.
38. Abadi, M. 2015 {TensorFlow}: Large-Scale Machine Learning on Heterogeneous Systems
Tensorﬂow2015-Whitepaper. Available online: https://www.tensorﬂow.org/ (accessed on 1 February 2020).
© 2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).